 The following content is provided under a Creative Commons license, your support will help MIT open courseware continue to offer high-quality
educational resources for free to make a donation or to view additional materials from hundreds of MIT courses, visit MIT open courseware at ocw.mit.edu.  in terms of x and y coordinates. So we've defined the
double integral of a region in plane of a function f of xy, dA, you can hear me, can you hear me at the back now? Can we make the sound louder?  OK, at the back, is it better? OK, people are still saying make it louder, is it better? OK, great, thanks. So that's not an excuse to start chatting with your friends. OK, so when we have a region in the xy plane, and we have a function of x and y,  we are defining the double-integol of f of this region by taking the sum of
value of a function of a function every y and here times the R-element. And the definition actually is we split the region into lots of tiny little pieces, we multiply the value of a function at that point times the R-element of a little p, and we sum that every way.  as I territory an integral, so first, integrating a dy
of n over dx of the other way around. So one example that we did in particular was to compute the double integral of a quarter of a unit disk,  goes to a p g and where x square plus y square is less than 1, and xn y positive of 1 minus x
square minus y squared, d a. And, well, hopefully, a kind of convinced you that we can do it using enough drag and substituents and so on, if it's not very pleasant. And the reason for that is that using x and y coordinates here doesn't seem very appropriate.  use polar coordinates instead to compute this
the point integral. So remember, polar coordinates are about replacing x and y as coordinates for a point in the plane by instead R, which is the distance from the origin  point and theta, which is the angle, measured counterclockwise from the
positive x axis. So in terms of R and theta, you have x equals R cosine theta, y equals R sine theta. So the claim is we are able, actually, to do the both integers in polar coordinates, we just have to learn how  So just to hold a quick picture, when we were integrating in xy
cordinates, in right-hand, g of our coordinates, we were slicing our region by grid lines that were either horizontal or vertical, and we used that to set up the iterated integral, and we said dA became dx, dx, dy or dy dx.  integrate in terms of the polar coordinates are and theta. So let's say we will integrate in the order, well, R first and then theta, that's the order that makes the most
sense, usually, when you do polar coordinates. So what does that mean? It means that we will first focus on a slice where we fix the value of theta  And we'll let R vary, so that means we fix a direction, we fix a
array out from the origin in a certain direction, and we'll travel along this way and see which part of it, which values of R are in our region.  in polar coordinates, it's just R equals 1, so we'll stop when R is 1. What about theta? Well, the first way that we might want to consider is the one that goes along the x axis, that's when theta equals 0, and we'll stop when theta reaches pi over 2, because we don't care about the rest of the
this, we only care about the first equivalent.  So we'll stop at pi over 2. Now, there's a catch, which is that dA is not dRD theta. So let me explain to you why. So let's say that we are slicing, what it means, really, is that we are cutting our region into little pieces, that the elementary what corresponds to a small rectangle in the xy
connate system, here would be actually a little  piece of circle between a given radius R and R plus delta R, and between an angle theta and
feta plus delta theta, so I need to draw it to the bigger picture, because it makes it really hard to read. So let's say that I fixed an angle theta, and a slightly different one, where I've added delta  that's what, and let's say that I have, or it just R, and I add delta R to it. So then I'll have a little piece of xy plane that's in here, and I have to figure out what is it's R0, what is delta A for this guy?  So my delta R and delta f it are small enough, it will almost look like a rectangle, it's rotated, but it's
basically a rectangle, I mean, these sides of course are curvy, but if they're short enough, it's almost tight. So the area here should be this length times that, well, what's this length?  So what about that length? Well, it's not delta-feta, it's something slightly different, it's a piece of a
circle of radius R corresponding to angle delta-feta, so it's R delta-feta.  is going to be R, dR, d theta. So that's an important thing to remember, when you
integrate in polar coordinates, you just set up your bounds in terms of R and theta, but you replace dA by R, dR, dR, d theta, not just dR, d theta. And then, of course, we have some function that we're integrating, let's say that I  then it's the same f that I could have here. So concretely, how do I do it here? Well, my function f was given as 1 minus x squared minus y squared, and I like to switch that to
polar coordinates, I want to put R and theta in there. Well, I have formulas for x and y in polar coordinates, so I could just replace x squared  by R square cosine square f of y square by R square sine square
sine square f of it, and that works just fine, but maybe you can observe that this is actually, this is x square plus y squared, it's just the square of a distance from the origin, so that's just R squared.  So now we just end up with the integral from 0 to pi over 2, integral from 0 to 1 of 1 minus R squared of dR, the f. Now, if I want to compute this interval, so let's first do the
interval in the interval.  So if I integrate R minus R cubed, I will get R squared over 2 minus R squared of S1 R to the 4 over 4, between 0 and 1, and then I will integrate the feta. So what is this equal to, well, for R equals 1, you get 1 1 1 1 1, 1 1 1, minus 1 quarter, that's going to be just 1 quarter, and when you plus 0, you get 0, so it's the
integral from 0 to pi over 2,  of 1 quarter, d-feta, and that just integrates to the
quart of pi over 2, which is pi over 8. So that's a lot easier than the way we did it yesterday. Now, well, here we were lucky. Usually, you will switch to polar coordinates, either because the region is easier to set up.  because c of a balance became very simple, we don't have that square root of 1 minus x
squared, or because the integrand becomes much simpler. Here, our function, well, it's not very complicated in xy coordinates, but it's even simpler in our theta coordinates. So here we were very lucky, in general, there's maybe a trade-off, maybe it will be easier to set up a balance, but maybe the function will become harder, because it will have all these
since and cosine's in it.  just x, x is very easy in xy coordinates, here it becomes R cosine theta, which means you will have a little bit of
trigger to do in the integral, not a very big one, not a very complicated integral, but imagine it could get potentially much harder.  is, so in 99% of the cases, you will integrate over R first, so what you will do is you will look for a given
fether, what are the bounds for R to be in the region? What is the portion of my array that's in the given region? And then you will put the bounds for the data. Conceptually, it's the same as before, just instead of slicing horizontally or vertically, we slice it radially.  Any questions about this, or the original one, if it? Yes?  this one. So here, I said this side is R delta theta. I could have said, actually, R delta theta is the length here, here, it's a slightly more, R plus delta R
times delta theta, but if delta R is very small compared to R, then that's almost the same thing, and this is an approximation anyway. So I took this one because it gives me the
simple of formula. If you want, if you take the limit as delta R tends to 0, then the two things  the length, whether you put R or R plus delta R in here, it doesn't matter anymore. If you imagine that this guy is
infinity small, then really the length is become the same. We'll also see another proof of this formula using changes of variables next week, but hopefully this is at least slightly convincing.  So let's see. So we've seen how to compute double integers, I have to tell you what they're good for as well.  and in volume is as fun, but it's not all
all varies to life, and you're doing single integrals, when you do single integrals, it's usually not to find the RR of some region of a plane, it's for something else, usually. So the way we actually think of a double integral is really as summing the values of a function, all of our this region, so we can use that to get information about maybe the region, or about the average value of a function in the
function and so on.  about various uses of the
belimticles. So the first one that I will mention is actually something you thought maybe you could do with a simple integral, with a single integral, but it's useful very often to do it as a double integral, it's to find the area of a given region.  some region in the plane, and you want to know just its area. So in various cases, you could set this up as a single integral, but it could be useful to set it up as a double integral. So how do you express the area as a
doable integral? Well, the area of this region is the sum of the areas of all the little pieces, so it means you want to sum 1 dA over the entire region  So the area of R is the double integral of R of a function 1. So one way to think about it, if you're really still attached to the idea of
the
double integral as a volume, what this measures is the volume below the graph of a function 1, the graph of a function 1, is just a horizontal plane at height 1.  think would be the volume of a
prezum with base R and height 1, and the volume of that, of course, would be base times height, so it would just be the array of R again.  is some object, some physical object, it's got to be a flat object, because we're just dealing with things in the plane so far, but you have a flat, metal plate, or something, and you would like to know it's mass. While it's mass is the sum of a message of everything, every little piece, so you would get that by integrating the density, the density for a flat object, would be the
or the mass per unit area.  So you can get the mass of what, flat, object with density, so let's use delta for density, which is the mass per unit LL.  each little piece of your object will have a mass, which will be just the density, times it's a real for each small piece. And you will get the total mass by summing these things, so the mass will be the double integral of the density times the area element. Now, if it has constant density, if it's always the same
material,  So then of course, you could just take with n-city out, and you will get the n-city times with
total area, and if you know that it's always the same material, but if it's actually it has varying than-city, maybe because it's some methodic thing that we've various metals, also with varying thickness, or something, then you can still get the mass by integrating with n-city.  a few weeks will be doing triple integers, and then we'll be able to do
subit in space, one thing at a time.  value of some quantity in a region. So what does it mean to take the average value of some function f in this region R? Well, you know what's the average of a finite set of
data? For example, if I ask you to compute your average score on a 2 to the problem set, you would just take the
squares, add them up and divide by the number of  what if there's infinitely many things, because as you define the average
temporary in this home, where you would have to measure the
temporary or every where, and then add all of these together and divide by the number of data points, but depending on how careful you are, there's potentially infinitely many points to look at.  and then you divide by the size of a sample, which is just the
array of the region. So in fact, the average of f of f, so the notation we'll use, usually for that, is f with a bar on top to tell us the average f.  by the R a of the region. You can really think of it as the sum of the values of f
everywhere, divided by the number of points in every where. And so that's an average where everything is actually equaled likely, that's a uniform average, where all the points in the region, all the little pieces of the
periodes are equaled likely.  want to do say an average of a sum of some solid with
value of a variable density, or if you want to somehow give more importance to certain parts than 2 over L, then you could actually do a weighted average. So what's a weighted average?  count it as 2 of course, when you divide. So the weighted average is the sum of the values that each weighted by a
sub-negative coefficient, and the value will divide by the sum of the weights. So it's a bit of a same idea as when we replace RR by some mass that tells you how important a given piece is.  what would be now, we'll see what we divide by, but what we will take is the integral times of a function, times the
density, times the R a element, because this would correspond to the mass element, telling us how to wait the various points of our region. And then we would divide by the total weight, which is the mass of the region, so as defined up there.  So if a density is uniform, then of course, the density gets out and you can simplify and reduce to that if all of the points are
equalarily likely. So why is that important? Well, that's important for various applications, but one that you might have seen in physics, we care about maybe where is the center of mass of a given object?  is basically a point, you would call that point, you would say that
point is right in the middle of the object, but of course, if the object has a very strange shape, or if somehow part of it is heavier than, for rest, then that takes a very different meaning. So strictly speaking, the center of a set of math of a solid is the point where you would have to concentrate all of a math if you wanted it to behave equivalently from the point of view of mechanics if you are trying to do translations  that's a subject, if you are going to push that object, that would be really where the equivalent
point of a point of mass would lie. The other way to think about it, if I have a flat object, then the center of mass is basically the point where I would need to hold it so that it's perfectly balanced, and of course, I can't do this, because I'm not, well, what about it, you get the feeling, the center of mass of this irration is somewhere in the middle,  So that's why I would have to put my finger for it to say, well, and it doesn't work. OK, but that's where the center of a
center of a set of mess should be. I think it should be in the middle. So maybe if an uncooled is free, it should call less, maybe 2a or whatever, because it's really a special case of the average value  So how do we find the center of the center of a
subject, with the set of delta?  at positions that are actually just the coordinates of a
sense of a set of mass will just be the weighted of rages of x and y on the solid. So the center of mass will be at a position that I will call x bar y bar, and these are really just the average values of x and of y in the solid.  times the double-integol of x times the n-thedensity d, and same thing with y, y bar is the weighted average of the y-coordinate in your region.  of the region, but if the region has a strange shape, or if a density is not homogeneous, if
about the fit of heavier, then you will get whatever the weighted average will be, and that would be the point where this thing would be balanced if you were trying to balance it on a pole or on your finger.  Any questions, so far?  Yes? So when you do that, I'll tell what it goes over here, the n or 1 is y, y, y, and
1, and L, which is S. No, no, no, no, no, no, so when you do, I mean, so here, I set up this, I didn't set this up as an I-terrated integral yet. So here, the function that I'm integrating is x times delta, where delta, where delta, the density, will be given to me, maybe, as a function of x and y,  And then I will integrate this d a, and d a could mean d x d y,
could mean d y, d y d x could mean R, d R, d theta. I will choose how to set it up, depending maybe on the shape of a region. If my solid is actually just going to be round, then I might want to use polar coordinates. If it's a square, I might want to use xy coordinates. If it's more complicated, I will choose depending on how I feel about it.  So delta is the density, it's in general, it's a function of x and y, if you imagine that your
solid is not homogeneous, then its density will depend on which piece of it you're looking at.  a proof of fact of math, we don't care about units. So if it's constant, we might as well take it to be 1, and that just means that our
mass unit becomes the area unit.  of a range of theta. See, for example, take a disk center that the origin, well, you know that the
centre of a set of Mess should be at the origin, but the average of R is certainly not 0 because R is positive everywhere. So that doesn't work. You cannot get the polar coordinates of a center of Mess just by taking the average of R and the average of theta.  So there's a problem there. So that actually just doesn't work. So we really have to compute x by the y-bound, but still we could set this up and then
switch to put our coordinates to evaluate this integral, which would still be computing the average values of x and y.  and make an x and a motion of solids here. So the next thing is the
moment of inertia. So just to remind you, or in case you somehow haven't seen it in physics yet, so the moment of inertia is basically to rotation of a solid, what the mass is to translation, in the following sense, the mass of a solid is what makes it hard  push it, how hard it is to throw something is really hit with its mess, how hard it is to spin something on the other hand, is
given by its
moment of inertia, maybe I should write this down. So mess is how hard it is to impart a translation motion to a study.  and the infancy wealth today, and the moment of inertia, so the difference with the masses at
moment of inertia is defined about some axis. So you choose an axis, and then you will try to measure how hard it is to spin your object around that axis. For example, I can try to measure how hard it is to spin this sheet of paper about an axis that's in the center of it, so you would try to spin it like that, and see how much  that you have to make, when for a sheet of paper, not very much, so that would measure the same thing, but it would be a
rotation, motion, about that x is.  If not, I'm going to try to try to derive it again. I'm sorry that it won't be quite as detailed as the way you've
probably seen it in physics, but I'm not trying to replace your physics teachers. I'm sure they're doing a great job.  it, then it has kinetic energy, and if you have a right device, then you can
converge back that kinetic energy into something else. So if you try to look at the kinetic energy of a point mass, so you have something with mass M going at the LSDV, well, that will be 1 1 1 1 1 of a mass times the square of a speed, hopefully you've  Sometime before. Now, let's say that instead of just trying to
push this mass, I'm going to make it spin around something, so instead of just somewhere, maybe I will have the origin, I'm trying to actually make it go around the origin at a certain angle of velocity.  M at distance R, let's call R is distance, and angular velocity, let's call the angular velocity omega, I think that's what physicists call it. So remember, the angular velocity is just the rate of change of the angle of our time, it's d-feta dT, if you want.  Well, what's the kinetic energy now? Now, when first we have to find out what's the speed, what's the speed, well, if we are going on a
circle of radius R at angular velocity omega, that means that in unit time we rotate by omega, and we go by a distance of R times omega.  the kinetic energy is 1, 1, 1, 1, and the squared, which is 1, 1, 1, 1,
m, R squared omega squared. And so by similarity with that formula, the coefficient of this squared is the mass. And here we'll see the coefficient of omega squared, so this thing, is the
moment of inertia.  Now, that's only for a point of mass. And it's kind of fun to spin just a small ball, but maybe you'd like to spin a larger, a larger,
sub-lit, and try to define this
small moment of inertia.  of inertia of a solid will be just the sum of a
moments of inertia of all the little pieces. So what we'll do is we'll just cut our solid into little chunks and we'll sum this thing for each little piece.  which is the density times the amount of R-rear, this is equal, actually, and the moment of inertia of a small
passion of the solid will be delta M, the small mass, times R squared, the square of a distance to the center to the x's around which I'm spinning.  So it has a moment of inertia, delta M times R squared, which is R squared times for density times delta A. And so I will be summing these things together. And so the moment of inertia about the origin will be the double integral of R squared times
density times dA.  So the final  for M y, for the moment of inertia, for the moment of inertia
about the origin is the double integral of the origin of R squared, then ct, dA. If you're going to do it in xy coordinates, of course, R squared becomes x squared plus y squared, it's the square of the distance from the origin  So when you integrate this, it tells you how hard it is to spin that
sub it about the origin. So the notion that we try to do, we keep this fixed, and then we just rotate around the origin.  Kinetic energy is 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, times this
moment of inertia times the square of the angular velocity. So it's in this sense that this replaces the mass for rotation motions.  So in particular, here we've been rotating things about just a point in the plane. What you could imagine, also, is, instead, you have your study.  would rotate in space in that direction like that. So let's say we do rotation about the x-axis. Well, the idea would still be the same. If a moment of inertia for any small
piece of a solid would be its mass element,  times the square of a distance to the x is, because that will be the radius of a trajectory, if you take this
point here, and it's going to go on a circle like that, center them the x-axis. So the radius will just be this distance here, well, what's this distance?  to x axis is absolute value of y, and what we actually care about is the square of a
distance, so that it will just be y squared. So the moment of inertia about the x axis is going to be obtained by integrating y squared, thanks for mass element.  not show about the x-axis, but if you think about it, why that is me how far I am from the x-axis, so how hard it will be to spin around the x-axis? I could do the same about
any other x-axis that I want, just I would have to sum the square of a distance to the x-axis of rotation.  Oh, sorry, same thing as a both, distance to the x
exists, because that's what we care about for the moment of inertia, we want the square of a distance to the x sub  in it around its center. So that shouldn't be very hard to figure out, say that we have a disk of radius a, and we want to rotate it about its center.  that say it is a uniformed density, and let's take just the density to be 1, so that we don't
be very care about the density. So what's the limit of inertia of that? Well, we have to integrate over how this, R squared times the density, which is 1 times dA.  no, it's not a, because we're looking at rotation at
rotation of any point inside this disk, and when you're inside the disk, for distance to the origin is not a, it's less than a, it's actually anything between 0 and a.  already polar coordinates, I mean, an assume a
sumotor repeat of what happens already with x and y. So that will tell us we want to integrate R squared times R dR, dR, d theta, and the bounds for R, well, R will go from 0 to a, no matter in which direction I go from the origin, if I fixed theta, R goes from 0 to R equals a.  is always from 0 to a, and a theta goes from, well, 0 to 2 pi, for example. And now you can compute this integral, well, I'll let you
figure it out, but the inner integral becomes a to the 4 over 4, and the outer, multiply things by 2 pi, so you get pi a to the 4 over 2.  OK, so that's how hard it is to spin this disk. Now, instead of spinning it about the center, we decide to spin it about the
point on the circumference. So for example, think of a freezby, it has this frame, and so you can actually try to make it rotate around the point on the circumference by holding it near the
remonds, spinning it there.  Well, we'll try to compute the moment of inertia at the moment of
inertial about this point. So we have two options. One is we keep the system of coordinates sent out here, but then for formula for distance to this point, becomes harder.  So about a point on the set of functions,  what I would have to do maybe is set up my origin like that. Now, I've moved the origin so that it's on the circumference of a disk, and I will, again, try to find the
moment of inertia of this disk about the origin. So it's still, for the Bolin-Tegrold of R squared,  dA, but now I want to find out how to set up the integral. So I could try to use xy coordinates, and it would work. I can use polar coordinates, and it works a little bit better that way, but both are doable. So let's say I do it this way. So I have to figure out how to set up my bounds.  well, if I fix a value of theta, so it means I chose an angle here, and now I'm shooting a
r a from the origin in that direction. So I enter my region at R equals 0, but hasn't changed. Question is, where do I exit the region? So what is that distance?  maybe not. So let's see, well, actually, I should have written down the radius of a
circle is a, so this distance here is 2a. So if you draw this segment in here, you know that here you have a right angle. So you have a right triangle, the hypotenuse here has length 2a, this angle is  well, this length is 2a cosine theta. So the polar coordinate's
equation of this circle, passing through the origin, is R equals 2a cosine theta. So R will go from 0 to 2a cosine theta.  distance. Now, what are the bounds for feta? It's not quite 0 to 2 pi because, in this direction, if I should write in this
direction, I will never meet my region.  I won't be in there, but actually, that's not 2 because the circle is tangent
to the x's. So in no matter which direction I take, I will still have a little tiny piece. So the angle actually goes from minus pi over 2 to pi over 2.  for a to the 4, cosine to the 4, theta, and now you will integrate that from minus pi over 2 to pi over 2, and that's, again, the equal integral that we had yesterday. So either we remember, if we may have a form yesterday, or we remember from yesterday, that
actually there's a
formulas in the notes to help you. So on homework, you can use this
formulas in the notes at the beginning of section  free b, thus formula S for these particular
kinds of integrals, and that will end up being free halves of pi a to the 4. So in case you wanted to know, it's free times, how are there to spend a freezby about a point in a circumference, then around the center? We've got free times for a moment of enough