 The following content is provided under a Creative Commons license, your support will help MIT open courseware continue to offer high-quality
educational resources for free to make a donation or to view additional materials from hundreds of MIT courses, visit MIT open courseware at ocw.mit.edu.  about that because there's a few small details that I didn't quite
clareify and that I should make a bit clearer, especially what happened at the very end of yesterday's class.  of this unit is about functions of several
values, so we've learned how to think of functions of two of revivals in terms of plotting them, in particular, well, not only the graph, but also the control plot, and how to read a control plot.  functions of these functions using partial derivatives. So remember, we've defined the partial of f with respect to some
variable say x to be the rate of change with respect to x when we hold all the other variables constant. So if you have a function of x and y, this symbol means you differentiate with respect  treating y as a constant. And we've learned how to package partial derivatives into a vector, the gradient vector. So for example, if we have a function of p-value, that's just the vector with components of the partial derivatives. And we've seen how to use the
grade the
infector of a partial  to derive various things such as
approximation formulas, so the change in f when we change x, y, and z slightly, is approximately equal to, well, there's several terms, and I can rewrite this in vector form,  as the gradient, that product, the amount by which the
opposition vector has changed. So basically, what causes f to change is that I'm changing x, y, and z by small amounts, and how sensitive f is to each variable is precisely what the partial derivative measure.  in fact, it amounts to identifying the graph of a function with its tangent plane, it means that we assume that the function
depends more or less linearly on x, y, g, and if we set these things equal, what we get is actually, we are replacing the function by its linear approximation, we're replacing the graph by its tangent plane.  of a dimensional space, so when we think of the graph, it's really with a
function of two variables, but also tells us how to find tangent planes to level surfaces.  given by the equation f of xyz equals c at a given point can be found by looking first for its
normal vector, and we know that the normal vector is, well, one normal vector is given by the gradient of a function, because we know that the gradient is actually pointing perpendicularly to the  towards higher values of a function, it gives us the direction of
fastest increase of a function. Any questions about these topics?  So why do we like partial derivatives? Well, one obvious reason is we can do all these things, but another reason is that really you need partial
dereatives to do physics and to understand much of a world around you because a lot of things actually are governed by what's called partial differential  So that's if you want a cultural remark about what this is good for. So a partial differential
equation is an equation that involves the partial derivatives of a function. So you have some function that's unknown that depends on a bunch of variables. And a partial differential equation is some relation between its partial derivatives.  involving the partial derivatives of an unknown function. So let me give you an example to say how it works.  is, one example of an example of a partial
definity of the partial differential equation, it's the equation, well, let me invite you, if I'd for you, for a space
version of it, and the equation, partial f partial t equals some constant times the sum of the second  an equation where we're trying to solve for a function f that
depends, actually, on 4 variables, x, y, z and t. And what should you think of? What should you have in mind? Well, this equation governs temperature. So if you think that f of x, y, z, t will be the temperature at a point in space at a point in
space at a position x, y, z, and that time t, then this  you, how temperature changes over time, it tells you that at any given point, the rate of
change of temperature over time is given by this complicated expression in the partial derivatives in terms of the space coordinates x, y, so if you know, for example, the initial, this distribution of temperature in this room, and if you assume that no thing is generating a
or taking heat away, so if you don't have an  to how the temperature will change over time, and eventually stabilize
to some final value. Why do we take the partial derivative twice?  physics of how heat is transported between particles in a fluid, or actually in any medium. But this constant k, actually, is called the heat conductivity, it tells you how well the heat flows through the material that you're looking at. So anyway, I'm giving it to you just to show you an example of a real-life problem where, in fact, you have to solve one of these things. So now, how to solve partial
definity equations is not a topic for this  class. It's not even a topic for 1803, which is called
definancial equations without partial, which means that, actually, you will learn tools to study and solve these equations between only one variable  satisfy many nice relations between their partial derivatives. So that was, in case you were wondering why on the syllabus for today, it's said partial
definity equations, now we've officially covered the topic, that's basically all we need to know about it, but we'll get back to that a bit later.  to my list of topics, so I should have written down that this
equation is solved by temperature at the point x, y, z at time t. And there are actually many of interesting, partial differential differential equations, you will maybe sometimes learn about the way of
equation that governs how waves propagate in space  about the diffusion equation, which tells you when you have maybe a mixture of two fluids, how this somehow makes over time, and so on. Basically, to every
problem you might want to consider, there's a partial differential equation to solve.  x mn problems. So remember that we've introduced an open of
critical points of a function. So a critical point is when all the partial derivatives  And then there are various kinds of critical points, there are a
maxima, there's a minimum, but there's also saddle points. And we've seen a method using second derivatives to decide which kind of critical point we have, so I should say that's for a function of two variables,  to try to decide whether a given
critical point is a minimum, a maximum or a saddle point. And we've also seen that actually that's not enough to find the minimum of a maximum of a function, because the minimum of a maximum could occur on the boundary.  say a function with graph looks like this, well, you're going to tell me, quite
obviously, that the maximum is this point up here, and that's a point where the first derivative is 0, that's a critical point, and we use the second derivative to c, that this critical point is a local maximum.  going to consider. So here, the minimum is at for boundedly, and the
maximum is at a critical point. So similarly, when you have a function of several variables, say of two variables, for example, then the minimum and the maximum and the maximum will be achieved either at a critical point, and then we can use these methods  to find where they are, are somewhere on the boundary of the set of
values that are allowed. So it could be that we actually achieve a minimum by making x and y as small as possible, maybe let them go to 0 if they had to be positive, or maybe by making them go to infinity. So we have to keep our minds open and look at various possibilities. So we're going to do a problem like that, we're going to go of a practice problem from the practice test.  to clarify this. So another important cultural application of minimum maximum
problems and two variables that we've seen in class is the list squares method to find the best fit line of the best fit, anything to find when you have a set of data points, what's the best linear approximation  And here I have some good news for you, why you should
definitely know what this is about, it will not be on the test.  But it doesn't mean that you should forget everything we've
seen about it. Now, what's next on my list of topics? So we've seen differentials, so remember, of a differential of f,  by definition, would be this kind of quantity. So at first, it looks just like a new way to
package partial derivatives together into some new kind of object. Now, what is this a good way to remember approximation formulas? It's a good way to also study how variations in x, y0 relate to variations in f.  and a truly by dx or by dy or by dz, in any situation that we want to find the idea of some
other variable to get chain rules, so the chain rule says, for example, there's many different situations, but for example, if x, y and z depend on some other variable  than u and v, then that means that f becomes a function of u and v, and then we can ask ourselves how sensitive is f to the value of u, and we can answer that.  So basically, what this quantity means is if we change
you and keep V constant, what happens to the value of f? Well, why would the value of f change in the first place when f is just a function of x, y, z, and not directly of you?  change when we change you. Well, how quickly we do that is precisely,
partial x, partial y, partial z, partial z, partial value, these are the rates of change of x, y, z when we change you. And now, when we change x, y and z, that goes is f to change.  that x changes when you change it, but then y also changes, y changes at this rate, and that
goes is f to change at that rate, and z changes as well, and that goes f to change at that rate, and the effect's add up together.  of changes of variables, if we have say a function defined in terms of
for our coordinates R and theta, and we'd like to switch it to rectangular coordinates x and y, then we can use chain rules to relate for partial derivatives.  So when our variables say xyz are related by some equation, so one way we can deal with this is to solve for one of the
variables and go back to two independent variables, but we can't always do that. Of course, on the example, you can be sure that I will make sure that you cannot solve for the variable you want to remove, because that would be too easy.  in this relation, we've seen two useful methods. One of them is to find the minimum of a
minimum of a maximum of a function when the variable sum that's independent, and that's the method of  So remember, to find the minimum or maximum of a function f,
subject to the constraint g equals constant, well, we've write down equations that say that the gradient of f is actually proportional  So there's a new variable here, lambda, the multiplier, and so for example, if f g, well, I guess here I had functions of three
value, so this becomes free equations, f sub x equals lambda g sub x, f sub y equals lambda g sub y, and f sub z equals lambda g sub z. And when we plug in the formula for f and g, well, we're left with three equations involving  of 4 variables, x, y, z and lambda, what's wrong? Well, we don't have, actually, for independent
variables, we also have this relation, g equals, well, whatever the constraint words, relating x, y, and z together. So then we can try to solve this, and depending on situations, it's sometimes easy, and sometimes it's very hard, or even impossible.  I haven't decided yet, but it could well be that the problem about
the Lagrange Multiplayer will just ask you to invite the equations not to solve them.  Whoops.  So another topic that we saw just yesterday is constraint partial derivatives. And I guess I have to explain a little bit because my guess is that things are not
extremely clear at the end of class yesterday.  of x, y, z, where the variables x, y and z are not independent, but are constrained by some
relation of this form. So some quantity involving x, y and z is equal to maybe 0 or some of our constant. And then what we want to know is what is the rate of change of f, with respect to one of the variables, say x or y or z, when I keep the other constant?  all the other of us constant, because that wouldn't be compatible with this condition. That would be the usual, also called formal partial derivative of f, ignoring the constraint. To take this into count means that if we variable one variable, well-keeping another one fixed, then the third one, since it depends on them,
must also change somehow, and we must take that into account.  So let's say, for example, we want to find, because I'm going to do a different
example from yesterday, so that if you really didn't like that one, you don't have to see it again. So let's say that we want to find the partial derivative of f, with respect to z, keeping y constant.  z varies, and x somehow is mysteriously a function of y and z for this
equation, and then of course, because it depends on y, that means x will vary, sorry, x depends on y and z and z varies. So now we're asking ourselves, what's the rate of change of f we respect to z in this situation?  And so we have two methods to do that. So let me start with a one with the
difficultals, which hopefully you kind of understood, you started, but if not, here's the second chance.  So using the frontials means that we'll try to express df in terms of dz in this
particular situation. So what do we know about df in general? Well, we know that df is f sub x dx plus f sub y dy plus partial f partial dz, dz. That's the general statement.  But first, y is constant, y is constant means that we can set dy to be 0. So this goes away and becomes 0. The second thing is, actually, we don't care about x. We like to get x because it's this dependent
value, what we really want to do is x plus df  in terms of dz. So what we need is to relate dx with dz. Well, to do that, we need to look at how the
variable are related. So we need to look at the constraint g. Well, how do we do that? We look at the differential of g.  y dy plus g sub z, dz, and that's 0 because we are setting g to always
to constant, g doesn't change. If g doesn't change, then we have a relation between dx, d, y, and dz. Well, in fact, we said we are going to look on the other case where y is constant, so y doesn't change, this becomes 0.  how x depends on z. And when we know how x depends on z, we can plug that into here and
get how f depends on z. Let's do that.  not change and keeping y constant, tells us gx, dx plus gz, gz is 0, and we'd like to solve for dx in terms of dz, that
tells us dx should be minus gz, dz, divided by gx. So if you want, this is the rate of change of x, with respect to z, when we keep y constant.  in our new
termin our terminology, this is partial z, no, this is partial x over partial z with y-health constant, this is the rate of change of x with respect to z.  will tell us that df is f sub x times dx, well, what is dx? dx is now minus gz of gz over gx dz plus fz dz, so that will be minus fx gz over gx plus fz times dz.  is the rate of change of f with respect to z in the situation we're
considering, so this quantity is what we call partial f over partial z with y-held constant. That's what we wanted to find. So now, let's see another way to do the same calculation, and then you can choose which one you prefer.  So the other method is using the chain hole.  So let's use the chain rule to understand how f depends on z when y is health constant. So let me first find the chain rule brutally, and then we'll try to analyze what's going on. So you can just use the
value that they have a fair as a template to see what's going on.  that I'm going to explain it, I'm not care for this, again.  and let's say that I'm varying x is keeping y constant, and I want to know how f
changes, well, f might change because x might change, y might change, and z might change. Now, how quickly does x change? Well, the rate of change of x in this situation is partial x, partial z with y-thead constant. So if I change x at this rate, then f will change at that rate.  So rate of change of y would be the rate of change of y respect to z
holding y constant, wait a second, if y is health constant, then y doesn't change. So actually, this guy is 0, and you didn't really have to write that term, but I wrote it just to be a systematic.  z is changing at a certain rate, this rate is this one, and that goes is f to change at that rate, and then we add the
fx together. See, it's nothing but the good old chain rule, just I've put these extra subscripts to tell us what is health constant and what is it. Now, of course, we can simplify it a bit more because here, how quickly does z change, if I'm changing z, well, the rate of change of z with respect  tell it is just 1. So in fact, the really mysterious part of this is the 1 here, which is the rate of change of x with respect to 0, and to find that we have to understand the constraint. So how can we find the rate of change of x with respect to 0? Well, we could use differentials, like we did here, but we can also keep
using the chain rule.  So how can I do that? Well, I can just look at how g would change with respect to z when y is a constant. So I just do the same
calculation, but with g instead of f.  But before I do it, let's ask ourselves first, what is this equal to? Well, if g is held constant, then when we vary z, keeping y constant and changing x, g still doesn't change, it's held constant. So in fact, that should be 0. But if we just say that we're not going to get to that,  So let's see how we can compute that using the chain rule. Well, the chain rule tells us g changes because x, y, and z change. How does it change because of x? Well, partial g, partial x times the rate of change of x. How does it change because of y? Well, partial g, partial y times the rate of change of y, but of course, if your smart or not, and me, then you don't need to
actually write this one, because y is health constant.  And then, because the rate of change because z
changes, and how quickly z changes here, of course, is 1. So out of this, you get that, well, I'm tired of writing, I think, partial g, partial x, so let me just write g sub x times partial x, partial x, partial zy constant, plus g  g sub z. And now we found how x depends on z. x, x, x, x, x, x, x, x, y, and y
health constant is negative g sub z of L, g sub x. Now, we plug this into that, and we get how and so.  OK, and then we get the n, so I'm not going to, I guess I can write it again.  that this is exactly the same formula that we had over here. In fact, let's compare these two
meat that side by side. I claim we did exactly the same thing just with different notation.  with y-health constant. And the term involving dy was replaced by 0 on both sides, because we
new, actually, that y is health constant. Now, the real difficulty in both cases comes from dx. And what we do about dx is we use the constraint. So here we use it by writing dg equals 0, here we write a chain rule for g, that's the same thing, just divided by dz with y-health constant.  So this formula or that formula are the same, just dividing by dz with y-held constant. And then in both cases, we used that to solve for dx, and then we plugged into the formula for df to express df dz, or partial f partial dz with y-held constant. So the two methods are pretty much the same.  We'll prefer a set one. Majority vote seems to be for differentials, that doesn't
mean that it's better, both are fine. You can use whichever one you want, but you should give both a try.  where did that go? I think I erased that part, so yes, we need to know direction of the derivative. The pretty much the only thing to remember about them is that the f ds in the direction of some
unit vector, u is just the gradient f dot product with u.  So that's pretty much all we know about them. Any of the topics that I've forgot to list? Yes? Can I erase people at the time? No, I would need free hands to do it.  And I think what we should do for is look quickly at the practice test, given the time you will mostly have to think about it yourself. So hopefully you have a copy of a practice exam.  The second problem is one about reading a control plot. And so before I let you go for a weekend, I want to make sure that you
know how to read a control plot.  that is the sign of a partial derivative of a positive
visit, 0, less than 0, more than 0, you don't need to bring a ruler to estimate partial derivatives in the way that this problem  I guess. So let's look at problem 2b. So the point 2b is asking you to find a point at which h equals 2,0 and partial
h, partial y is less than 0. So let's try and see what is going on here. So a point where f equals 2,0, 2,0, and 1,  zoom in, and here's the
level of 2200. Now, I want partial h, partial x to be 0. That means if I change x, keeping y constant, the value of h doesn't change. So which points on the level curve satisfy that property?  are here, for example, and you move in the x direction, what you see as you get to the left, the
high first increases and then decreases, it goes for a maximum at that point. So at that point, the partial derivative is 0 with respect to x, and same here. Now, we also told, and let's find partial h partial y less than 0.  off, we should go down, which one is it, top or bottom? Top, yes, here, if you go north, then you go from 2,200 to 2,100, so this is where the point is. So now, the problem here was also asking you to estimate partial
h, partial y, and just if you're curious how you would do that, you would try to figure out  long it takes before you reach the next
level curve, and you see that so here, to go from here to here, so to go from Q to this new point, say, Q prime, the change in y, well, you'd have to read the scale, which was down here, that would be about something like freehand  What's the change in height when you go from Q to Q prime, when you go down from
22, 100, to 21, 100, that's about, well, that's actually minus 100, exactly. And so delta h about delta y is about minus 1, 1, 1,  And that's an approximation for the partial derivative. So that's how you would do it.  times and the harder problems, expect something about computing,
gradients, approximations, space of change, expect a problem about reading a control plot, expect one about a min-max problem, something about lag-range multipliers, something about the chain rule, and something about constraint partial derivatives, I mean, pretty much all of the topics are going to be there.