 The following content is provided under a Creative Commons license, your support will help MIT open courseware continue to offer high-quality
educational resources for free to make a donation or to view additional materials from hundreds of MIT courses, visit MIT open courseware at ocw.mit.edu.  have non-independent variables, so I have a little bit here for j's and
you, I'm afraid we don't take that if it is joined last time, sorry.  OK, so Jason, you please claim your package at the end of lecture. OK, so last time we saw how to use Lagrange multipliers to find a minimum or maximum of a function of several
value, which went with a variable sum not independent. And today, we are going to try to figure out more about  relations between variables and how to handle functions that
depend on several variables when they're related. So just to give you an example, in physics very often, you have functions that depend on pressure, value, and temperature, where pressure, value, and temperature are actually not independent, but very related, say, by pv equals nRT.  in terms of two of them only, but very often it's
convergent to keep all free, but then we have to figure out what are the rates of change of p and v with respect to t, with respect to each other, the rate of change of f with respect to these variables, and so on.  let's say just for the sake of notation, I'm going to think of a function of a function of
fri-variable xyz where the variables that are related by some equation, that they will put in the form g of xyz equals some constant. So it's the same kind of set up as we had last time, except now we're not just looking for minimum and maximum, we're trying to understand partial derivatives.  first observation is that if x, y and z are related, then that means, in principle, we could solve for one of them an x
press it as a function of the two of us. So in particular, can we understand even without solving, maybe we cannot solve, can we understand how the variable's are related to each other?  z, you can think of z as a function of x and y, so we can ask ourselves what are the roots of
change of z with respect to x keeping y constant, or with respect to y keeping x constant. And of course, if we can solve, then we know a formula for this, and then we can compute these guys, but what if we can't solve?  this thing's without solving. Well, so let's do an example. Let's say that my relation is x squared plus yz plus z cube equals 8, and let's say that I'm looking near the point xyz equals 2, 3, 1, so let me  of 3 times 1 plus 1 plus 1 cubed is indeed 8, but now if I change x and y a little bit, how does c change? Well, of course, I could solve for c in here, it's a cubic
equation that is actually a formula, but that formula is quite complicated, we don't want to do that.  look at the differential of this constraint quantity. So if we call this g, let's look at dg. So what's the differential of this?  the zy, there's a y dz, and there's also a freez squared dz. You can get this either by implicit
differentiation and the product rule, or you can get this just by putting here and here, the partial derivatives of this, with respect to x, y and z.  Now, what do I do with this? Well, this represents somehow
variations of g, but I've set this thing equal to 8, and 8 is a constant, so it doesn't change.  well, they call this g, then g equals a is constant, that means we set dg equal to 0.  is 1, so dy plus y plus, y plus phrasey square should be 6, dz equals 0. And now this equation here tells us about a relation between the changes in x, y and z, and x, and x, and y, it tells us how if you
change x and y, well, how 0 will change, or I tell you, actually, anything you might want to know about
of a little bit of
value between these variables,  example, you can move dz to that side and then x plus dz in terms of dx and dy, or you can move dy to that side, and x plus dy in terms of dx and dz, and so on, it tells you at
valveal of the derivatives how each of the variables depends on the two of us.  then what we will do is we'll just move the dz is to the other side, and it will tell us dz equals minus 1 over
6 times for the x plus dy. And so that should tell you that partial z of a partial x is minus 4 over 6, well, that's minus 2,  over a partial y is going to be minus 1, 6. Another way to think about this, when we compute partial
z of a partial x, that means that actually we keep y constant, let me actually add some subtitles here.  And so if we keep y constant, another way to think about it is we set dy to 0, we set dy equals 0. So if we do that, we get dx equals negative 4, 6, dx. And that tells us the rate of change of the respect to x.  set dx equal to 0, and we have dz equals negative 1, 6 of dy, that
tells us the rate of change of z with respect to y. Any questions about that?  an expression for dz in terms of dx and dy, that means that this thing is the total
difficiential of z viewed as a function of x and y. And so the coefficients of dx and dy are the partial. Another way to think about it, if you want to know partial z, partial x, it means you set y to be constant. Setting y to be constant means that you will put 0 in the place of dy, so you'll be left with dz equals  minus 4, 6, dx, and that will give you the rate of
change of z with respect to x when you keep y constant. So various ways to think about this, but hopefully, it makes sense.  Well, if we know that g of x, y, z equals constant, then dg, which is g sub x, dx plus g sub y, dy plus g sub z, dz, should be set equal to 0.  And now we can solve for which of our variable we want to express in terms of the
obels. So for example, if we care about z as a function of x and y, we'll get that dz is negative g sub x of Lg sub  d x minus g sub y of L g sub z, d y. And so if we want partial z of our partial x, well, so one way is just to say that's going to be the
equalufficient of d x in here, or just to find done the other way,  y equals constant, so that means we set dy equal to 0. And then we get gz equals negative g sub x over g sub z dx, so that means partial z of a partial x is minus gx over gz. And c, that's a very counter-intuitive
formula, because you have  this minus sign that you somehow, probably, could not have seen come, if you had not
actually derived things this way, it's pretty surprising to see that minus sign come out of nowhere, the first time you see it.  into find if you want partial x, partial y or x partial y
or any of them, you can do it. Any questions, so far? No? So before we proceed further, I should probably expose some problem with the notation that we have so far.  let me try to get you a bit confused. So let's take a very simple example. Let's say I have a function f of xy equals x plus y. So far, it doesn't sound very confusing.  Now, let's do a change of variables. Let's set x equals y equals y
equals u plus v. It's not a very complicated change of variables, but let's do it.  becomes u plus, u plus, u plus b, that's twice
you plus b, what's partial f over partial u? S2. So x and u are the same thing, partial f over partial x and partial f over partial u, well, unless you believe that 1 equals 2, they're really not the same thing.  interesting, slightly strange phenomenon, x equals you, but partial f, partial x is not the same as
partial f, partial u. So how do we get rid of this contradiction? Well, we have to think a bit more about what these notations mean.  f of a partial x, it means that we are varying x, keeping y constant. When we write partial f of a
partial u, it means we're varying y and y, keeping y constant. So, if I keep y constant, then when I change x, so when I change u, then
we will also have to change so that the assumption stays the same.  of the other way around, when I do this one, if I keep a constant and I
change you, then y will change, it won't be constant. So that means, well, life looked quite nice and easy with these notations, but what's a dangerous about them is they're not making explicit what it is exactly,  just to write things. So here we change u and x by the same thing, but we keep y constant. While here, we change u, which is still the same thing as x, but what we keep constant is
v, in terms of x and y that's y minus x constant.  And that's why I've not the same. So whenever there's any risk of confusion, so not in the case that we had before, because in what we've done until now, we didn't really have any
problem, that in a situation like this to clarify things will actually say explicitly what it is that we want to keep constant.  So what's going to be our new notation? Well, it's not particularly pleasant because it uses now a subscript not to indicate what you're differentiating, but what you're hold constant. So that's quite a conflict of notation with what we had before. I think I can safely blame it on physicists or chemists.  So this one means we keep y constant, and partial f of a partial
u with v-health constant, similarly. So now what happens is we don't longer have any contradiction, we have partial f of our partial x  y constant is different from partial f over partial x with b constant, which is the same as
partial f over partial f of a, partial to you with b constant. So this guy is 1 and this guy is 2. So now we can safely use the fact that x equals u if we are  think of what is actually a really hard constant. So now that's going to be
particularly important when we have variables that are related, because let's say now that I have a function that depends on x, y, and z, but x, y and z are related, then it means that if I look at say x and y as my independent variables, and z as a function of x and y, then it means that when  I do partial say with respect to x, I will hold y constant, but I will let
z as a function of x and y, or I could do it the other way around, I could very x keep z constant and let y be a function of x and z.  questions? No? What do I write? So let's try to do an example where we have a function that
depends on variables that are related. So I don't want to do one with pb equals nRt because probably, if you've seen it, then you've seen too much of it, and if you haven't seen it, then maybe it's not for best example.  So let's look at the array of a triangle. So let's say I have a triangle, and my variables will be the side a and b, and the angle here, theta. So what's the array of this triangle?  So it's 1 1 1 half of the base is a, and the height is b sine theta. So that's a function of a, b, and theta. Now, let's say, actually, there's a relation between a, b, and theta, but I didn't
tell you about, namely, I want to assume that it's a right triangle.  let's now assume it's a right triangle with, let's say the hypertoneuse is b. So we have a right-angled here, actually. So a is here, b is here, f is here. So saying that a right triangle is the same thing, saying that a equals b
equals sine theta.  So that's our constraint. That's the relation between a, b, and theta, and this is a function of a, b, and theta. And let's say that we want to understand how the R-area depends on theta. What's the rate of change of the R-area of this triangle  with respect to theta. So I claim there's
some various answers. I can think of at least three possible answers.  So what can we possibly mean by the rate of change of a with respect to theta? So these are all things that we might want to call
partial a partial a, a partial theta, but of course, we'll have  to actually use different notations to distinguish them. So the first way that we actually already know about is if we just forget about the fact that the
value of the variables are related. So if we just think of little a, b and theta as independent variables, and we just change theta,  So that's exactly what we meant by a partial a, a
papolifeta, right? We are not putting any constraint, so just to  use some new notation that would be the right of a with respect to
feta, keeping a and b fixed at the same time. Of course, if we are keeping a and b fixed and we are changing theta, it means we completely ignore this property of being a right triangle. So in fact, it corresponds to changing the RR by changing the angle, keeping these lengths fixed, and of course, we lose the right angle.  the right angle, and that one we know how to compute, because it's the one we've
been computing all along, so that means we keep a and b fixed, and then, so let's see, what's the derivative of a, with respect to theta?  OK, that one we know. Any questions? Nope, the two of our guys will be more interesting. So far, I'm not really doing anything with my constraint.  a constant, and then of course b will have to change, because if this width stays the same, then when I change f, the height
increase, and then this side length increases. The other option is I change the angle, keeping b constant, so actually this side stays the same length, but then a has to become a bit shorter. And of course, the area will change in different ways, depending on what I do.  that's why I say we have very different answers. So the next one is, I forgot which one I say first, let's say,
keep a constant, and that means that b will change, b is going to be some function of a and theta,  that here we know what the function is, because we can
serve the constraint, namely b is a over cosine theta, but we don't actually need to know that, so that the triangle, so that the right  And so the name we will have for this is partial a of a partial f of a
health constant, and the fact that I'm not putting b in my subscript there means that b will be a dependent variable, it changes in whatever way it has to change so that when f that changes, a, c is the same, b  And the third guy is the one where we actually keep B constant. And now, A, we think of A as a function of B and theta, and it changes so that we keep the right angle.  that's given over, it's given over a equals b cosine theta. And so this guy is called partial a
over-partial theta with b-hard constant. So we've just defined them. We don't know yet how to compute these things. That's what we're going to do now. But is the definition, and what these things mean is that
clear to everyone?  Yes, OK, so the second answer, again, so one way to ask ourselves, how does the R-R-R-I depend on theta, is to say, well, we'll actually look at the R-R-I of a right triangle as a function of a and a
feta only by solving for b.  and then we'll change theta, keep a constant and ask, how does the R-Ia change? So when we do that, when we change theta and
keep a the same, then b has to change so that it stays a right triangle, so that this relation still holds, that requires us to change b. So when we write partial a of a partial theta with a constant, it means that b will be the dependent variable  it depends on a and theta, and so the a-y-y-a depends on theta, not only because theta is in the
formula, but also because b changes and b is in the formula.  change feta a little bit in this one, if I change feta a little bit, and they keep a the same, then b has to change also in some way, so that it's
tays a right triangle, and then because feta and b change, that causes the area to change. So maybe I should explain that.  equals b cosine and theta, that means that b changes, and then the question is, how does a change? Well, it will change in part because theta
changes and in part because b changes, but we want to know how it depends on theta in this situation.  that's a very good question. So what about I don't keep a and b constant? Well, then there's two many choices. So I have to decide, actually, how I'm going to change things.  how will it change if I change feta and do random things with a and b, it depends what I do with a and b. Of course, I could choose to
change them simultaneously, but then I have to specify how exactly I'm going to do that.  I mean, we could call this guy c, and then we'd have a
different formula and so on. So I mean, I'm not looking at it for simplicity, but you could have minimum.  because whatever I had messed so that the constraint keeps holding. So let's try to compute one of them. Let's say I decide that we'll compute this one.  So let's try to compute partial  of a partial theta with a constant. So let's see three different
fraindes of doing that. So let me start with method 0. It's not a real method. That's why I'm not giving it a positive number.  Yet it works well because we know how to solve for b, that I'm not considering this to be a real method, because in general, we don't know how to do that. If we use, in the beginning I had this
relation that was an equation of degree free, you don't really want to solve your equation for the dependent variable, usually.  So how do we do that? Well, the constraint is a equals b cosine theta, that means b is a of a cosine theta.  a and theta only, a is 1 1 1 half of a, b cosine, so a, b sine theta, is now 1 1 1 1 half of a squared sine theta of a
coseinfeta, or if you prefer, 1 1 1 1 half of a squared tangent theta.  function of a and theta, I know what it means to take the partial derivative, with respect to theta,
keeping a constant, I know how to do it. So partial a over partial theta with a had constant, well, if a is a constant, then I get this 1, 1, 1, 1,  times, what's the derivative of tangent, second squared, very good? If you're European and you've never heard of second, that's 1 over cosine, and if you know the derivative as 1 plus
tension square, that's the same thing, and it's also correct. So that's one way of doing it, but as I've already said, it doesn't get as far if we don't know how to  I mean, we really used the fact that we can solve for the
and get rid of it. So there's two systematic methods, and let's say the basic role is that you should give both of them a chance, you should see which one you prefer, and you should be able to use one of the over on the exam,  you will actually have a choice between one or the other, will be up to you to decide which one you want to use, but you cannot use
subsequence and substitution, that's not fair.  I'm not promising that I have the same one I have, I mean, I may have 1 and 2 switched, it doesn't really matter. So how do we do things using different? Well, first, we know that we want to keep a fixed, and that means that we'll set d a equal to 0.  the constraint is a equals b cosine theta, and we want to differentiate that. Well, differentiate the left-hand side, you get d a, and differentiate the right-hand side, as a function of b and theta, you could get, well, how many db's, that's the right of
change with respect to b, that's cosine theta db, minus b sine theta,  of d theta, that's a product rule apply to b times cosine theta. So now, if we have a constraint that's
relating d a, db, and d theta, so that's actually what we did, that's the same sort of thing as what we did at the beginning when we  that's really the same thing, except now our variable is a, b and theta. Now we know that also we're keeping a fixed, so we set this equal to 0, so we have 0 equals d a equals cosine
b minus b sine theta d theta, that means that we know how to solve for db.  b equals b sine theta, b theta, or db is b tangent theta, d theta. So in fact, what we found, if you want, is the rate of change of b with respect to theta.  the function between what we want to look at. So the function is a equals 1, 1 1, a, b sine theta, well, then d a, so we have to use the product
whole carefully or we use the partials. So the coefficient of d little a will be partial respect to little a, that's 1, 1, 1, 1, b sine theta, d a, plus  it will be 1 1 1 1 1 half a sine
feta db plus coefficient of d theta will be 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 a, b cosine theta d theta. But now, what do I do with it? Well, first, I say a is constant, so d a is 0.  a as a function of feta. So maybe we actually want to use this
for Muretta for db that we found in here, and then we'll be left only with d-feta, which is what we want.  So if we plug this one into that one, we get  d a equals 1 1 1 1 half a sine theta times b tangent
feta, d theta plus 1 1 1 1 1 half a, b cosine theta, d theta, and if we collect these things together, we get 1 1 1 1 1 1 of a, b times sine theta  the tangent theta plus cosine theta, d theta. And if you know your trick, then you will see that this is sine square over cosine plus cosine square over cosine, that's the same as second theta. So now you have expressed d a as something times d theta, well, that coefficient is the rate of change of a with respect  with the understanding that we are keeping a fixed and let it be
value as a dependent variable, not in a space.  So we wanted to find how a changes, to find how a changes with dA, but now this tells us how a
depends on little a, little b and theta. Well, we know actually we want to keep little a constant, so we set this to be 0.  figuring out how B depends on feta when a is fixed, and we do that by differentiating the
contrainted equation and setting d a equal to 0.  of d a, db, d theta, then we say that a is constant means we set d a equals 0. And the third thing is that, well, we differentiate the constraint.  can solve for db in terms of d theta, and then we plug into d a, and we get the answer.  So here's an other method to do the same thing differently, to use the chain rule. So we can use the chain rule with
dependent variables. So what does the chain rule tell us?  we respect to theta, hold being a constant. So I claim, well, what does the change
hold tell us? It tells us that when we change things, a changes because of the changes in the variables. So a part of it is that a depends on theta, and theta changes.  with respect to theta with a constant, but of course, how fast that theta
dependent itself, the answer is 1, so that's pretty easy. plus then we have this, the partial derivative, the formal partial derivative of a, with respect to little a, times the rate of change of a in our situation.  And then, there's a sub little b, the formal partial
direbitative times, sorry, the rate of change of b. And how do we find this one? Well, here we have to use the constraint. And we can find this one from the constraint as we  seen at the beginning, either by differentiating the constraint or by using the
channel on the constraint. So of course, the calculations are exactly the same. This is the same formula as the 1 over L, just dividing everything by partial theta and with subscripts little a.  So to my whole, we're going to review for the test, so I'm going to tell you a bit more about this, also as we go
over one practice problem in that.