 The following content is provided under a Creative Commons license, your support will help MIT open courseware continue to offer high-quality
educational resources for free to make a donation or to view additional materials from hundreds of MIT courses, visit MIT open courseware at ocw.mit.edu.  So, more precisely, we're going to be talking about the interval intervals.  let me just remind you that when you have a function of
1 variable, say f of x, and if you take its integral from, say, a to b of f of x dx, well, that corresponds to the R  f over the interval from a to b. So the picture is something like, if you have a, you have b, you have the
graph of f, and then what the integral measures is the area of this  this region. And when we say the array of this region, of course, if f is positive, that's what happens, if f is negative, then we count
negatively, the RL below the x-axis. So now, when you have a function of two variables, then you can try to do the same thing, namely, you can plot its graph, it's graph will be a surface in space, and then we can try to look for a
value below the graph, and that's what we will call the double integral  of a function over a certain region. So let's say that we have a function of two
value of x and y, then we'll look at the volume that's below the graph, z equals f of xy.  So let's draw a picture for what this means. I have a function of x and y, I can draw it's graph, the graph will be the surface with
equation, z equals f of x and y. And while I have to decide where I will integrate the function, so for that I will choose some region in the xy claim  and they will integrate the function on that region, so it's
over a region R in the xy-play, so they have this region R, and I look at the piece of a graph that is above this region, and we'll try to compute the volume of this solid here.  a double integral will measure. So we'll call that the double integral of the
reason R of f of x, y, dA, and I will have to explain what the notation means. So dA here stands for a piece of a root of a, a stands for R.  indicate somehow the region of a which we're integrating, we'll come up with more concrete notation when we see how to
actually compute these things, but that's the basic definition.  And then for each little piece, you take a value of a function, and you multiply by the weight of a
p's that gives you a rectangular slice, and then you sum all of these rectangular slices together. So here we'll do the same thing. So let me put a picture up and explain what it does. So we are going to cut our region into little pieces, say little rectangle,  And then for each piece, with a small
area delta a, we'll take the area delta a times the value of a function in there that will give us the volume of a small box that sits under the graph. And then we'll add all these boxes together, that gives us an estimate of a volume. And then to get, in the integral, the integral will be defined as a limit as we sub divide into smaller and smaller boxes and with some more and more pieces.  So actually, what we do, I still have a board here. So the actual definition, it's getting R into small p's of R  maybe delta a, I, the array of the I of the I of p's. And then, so maybe in the xy claim, we have our origin, and we'll cut it maybe using some grid, and then we'll have each small p's, each small p's, we'll have a, I mean, delta a, I, and it will be at some point, let's  call it x i, y i, y i, x i, and then we'll consider the sum of all the
pieces of f at that point, x i, y i times the RR of a small piece. So what that corresponds to, in the free-dimensional picture, is just to I sum the volumes of all of these little  that set and the over graph. And then, so what I do is, actually, I take the limit as the size of the pieces, tends to 0, so I have more and more
and more small and smaller pieces.  and that gives me the double integral. So that's not a very good sentence, but whatever. So that's the definition. Of course, we'll have to see how to compute it. We don't actually compute it. When you compute an integral in a single
value of a single-value calculus, you don't do that, you don't cut into little pieces and some of the pieces together.  how to actually compute these things without doing that
cutting into small pieces. But any questions first about the concept or what the definition is?  all the tricks you've learned in single-value-value-value calculus will come in handy. So that's a strong
signal, by the way, that if you've forgot, and everything about single-value-value-value calculus, now it might be a good time to
times to actually brush up on integers.  that's what we have to come up with. And going back to what we did with derivatives to understand
variations of functions and derivatives, what we did was really we took slices parallel to an x sub n over 1. So in fact, here, the key is also the same. So what we're going to do is instead of cutting into a lot of small boxes, like that, and something completely at random, we'll actually somehow scan our region, scan through our region by parallel  the planes. So let me put up actually a slightly
definity picture up here. So what I'm going to do is I'm going to take planes, say, in this picture, parallel to the y-z plane, I'll take a moving plane that scans from the back to the front or from the front to the back.  all values of x0. So now in each slice, I get what looks a lot like a single
value variable integral, and that integral will tell me what is the RR in this, well, I guess, supposed to be green, but it all comes as black. So let's say the black shaded slice, and then when I add all of these RRs together as the value of x changes, I will get the value of the value of x  So to compute this integral, what we do is actually we take slices. So let's, instead of let's call S of x, the area of a slice,  by a plane parallel to the y-z plane. So on the picture, S of x is just the area of this thing in the vertical wall. Now, if you sum all of these, well, let's see, why does that work? So if you take the origin between two
parallels slices that are close to each other, what's the value  between these two things. Well, it's essentially S of x times the thickness of this
very thing slice, and the thickness would be delta x, so dx, if you take a limit with more and more slices.  x, well, we would have to start at the very lowest value of x that ever happens in our
or region, and we'd have to go all the way to the very largest value of x from the very far back to the very far front. So, in this picture, we'd probably start over here at the back, and with n's over here at the front.  just say from the minimum x to the
minimum x to the maximum x. And now, how do we find S of x? Well, S of x will be, actually, again, an integral, but now it's an integral of a variable y, because when we look at this slice, what changes from left to right is y.  but let me actually point that down, for a given x, the R a, S of x, you can compute as an integral of f of xy, dy.  the leftmost point here, to the rightmost point here, on the given slice. So there's a big catch here, that's a very important thing to remember. What is the range of integration for y, depends on x? If I take this slice that's picture on that diagram, then the range for y goes all the way from the very left to the right, but if I take a slice that's near the very front,  then, in fact, only a very small
small segment of it will be in my origin. So the range of values for y would be much less, let me actually draw a 2d picture for that.  is sitting above that, and that's the original R. I have the original R, and I have the graph of a function above
this original R, and I'm trying to find the RR between this segment and the graph above it in this vertical plane.  here to here, I want the area of a p that sits above this red segment. And so in particular, the end point, the x-train values for y
depend on x, because if I slice here instead, my bounds for y will be smaller. So now, if I put the two things together, what I will get,  is actually a formula where I have to integrate over x an integral of y.  And so this is called an iterated interval, because we iterate twice the
process of taking an interval. So again, what's important to realize here, I'm going to say that several times over an x few  but that's because it's a single most important thing to remember about the
what in take-als, the bounds here are just going to be numbers, because the question that I'm asking myself here, is what is the first value of x by which I want to slice, and what is the last value of x, which range of x do I want to look at to take my right slices?  somewhere here, that's my last slice. For any value in between these, I will have some red
segment, and I will in 1 to integrate a little bit. On the other hand, here, the bounds will depend on the outer variable x, because if I fix a value of x, what the values of y will be,  should do lots of examples to convince ourselves, and
see how it works. So it's called an iterative integral because first we integrate over y, and then we integrate again over x.  is how the bounds on y, depend on x. But actually, you could also do it the other way around, first integrate
or x and then of y, and then the bounds for x would depend on y. We'll see that on an example.  a plot in the xy plane, above that we have a cluster draw a picture here instead, for a given
value of x, so that's a given slice, I have a range of values for y that is from this picture, it's the leftmost point on that slice to the rightmost point on that slice, where I stop and where I stop,  OK, no more questions? So let's do a first example. So let's say that we want to integrate the function 1 minus x square minus y squared of our region  defined by x between 0 and 1, and y between 0 and 1. So what does that mean, geometrically? Well, g equals 1 minus x squared minus y squared, and it's a variation on something, I think, actually, we've plotted that one. That was our first example of a function of two variables, possibly. And so we saw that the graph is this
paraboloid point in downwards, it's what you get by taking a parabola  of what they think it. And now what we're asking is what is the value between the
paraboloid and the xy plane over the square of side 1 in the xy plane, x and y between 0 and 1? So what we'll do is here, I've tried to represent the square, and we'll just sum the areas of the slices as, say,  x varies from 0 to 1. And here, of course, setting of a
bound will be easy because no matter what x I take, y still goes from 0 to 1. See, it's easiest to do double integrals when the region is just a rectangle in the xy plane, because then you don't have to worry too much about what the range is.  to 1 of the integral from 0 to 1 of 1 minus x squared minus y squared dy dx. So I'm dropping the parentheses, but if you still want to see them, I'm going to put them in very thin, so as you see what it means, but actually, the convention is we want to put these
percentes in there, so what this means is first, I will integrate 1 minus x squared minus y squared over  by arranging from 0 to 1 with x-thelt fixed. So what that represents is the R-R in this slice, so c, here, I've drawn, well, what happens is a function
take positive and negative values. So in fact, I will be counting positive, this part of the R-R, and I will be counting negative, this part of the R-R, as usual, when I do an integral.  what I will do to evaluate this, I will first do what's
going to be in our integral. So to do the in-air integral, well, it's pretty easy, how do I integrate this?  anything to remember is we want to integrate it in respect to y, not to x. We want to
goes x squared is x squared times y, and then the integral of y squared is y cubed over f of R. And then we plug in the bounds, which are 0 and 1 in this case. And so when you plug y equals 1, you will get 1 minus x squared minus 1 third  minus, well, for y equals 0, you get 0, 0, 0, 0, so nothing changes. Pass your left with 2, 3rds, minus x squared. And that's a function of x only. Here, you shouldn't see any y's anymore, because y is your
integration variable, but you still have x, you still have x because the area of this shaded slice  And so now, the second thing to do is to do the
outter integral. So now we integrate from 0 to 1, what we got, which is 2, 3rd minus x squared, dx. And we know how to compute that, because that integrates 2, 2, 3rd, x minus 1, 3rd x cubed,  0 and 1, and I let you do the computation, you will find it's 1 third. So that's the final answer. So that's the general pattern. When we have a double interval to compute, first, we want to set it up carefully, we want to find what will be the
bound in x and y, and here that was actually pretty easy because our region was very simple.  then we compute the outer integral, and that's it. Any questions at this point? So by the way, we started with a dA in notation, here we had dA, and that somehow became a dy dx.  d a became d y d x because when we do the I-th right-hand integral this way, what we're actually doing is that we're slicing our
rigin into small rectangles. Now, what's the area of a small rectangle here? Well, it's the product of its width times its height so that delta x times delta y.  equals delta x delta y, so actually, it's not just
becomes, it's really equal for the small rectangles for. Now, it became dy, dx and not dx dy, well, that's  in which order we do the iterative integral, it's up to us to decide whether we want to
integrate x first, then y, or y first, then x, but as we'll see very soon, that is an important decision when it comes to setting up the bounds of integration.  So because the region has a strange shape, you can actually set it up more
easily one-way than the other. Sometimes it will also be that the function here, you actually know how to integrate it in one way, not the other. So the theory is that it should work both ways, in practice, one of the two calculations maybe much harder.  let's do another example. Let's say that what I wanted to know was not actually what I computed, namely the
value below the paraboloid, but also the negative of some part that's in the corner towards me, but that's really what I wanted was just the volume between the paraboloid and the xy plane, so looking only at the part of it that sits above the xy plane.  n-tire square of size 1, I should just integrate over the
quart or disk, I should stop integrating where my paraboloid hits the xy-plane, so let me draw another picture.  1, 2, so it's a same, we're going to do the same function, but over a
different region, and the region will just be now this plot or this care. So maybe I should draw a picture in the xy plane, that's my new region,  So in principle, it will be the same interval, but what change is the bounds?  nice, that's above the xy plane, and I don't want to take this part that's actually outside of my disk. So I should stop integrating
of a y when y reaches this value here. On that picture here, on this picture, that's me, for a fixed value of x, the range of values for y should go only from here to here, so that's from here to less than 1.  So if I'll give an x, the range of y is, well, so what's the lowest value of y that I will want to look at? It's still 0 from y equals 0 to what's the value of y here, well, I have to solve in the
equation of a circle.  if I'm here, this is x squared plus y squared equals 1, that means y is square root of 1 minus x squared. So I will integrate from y equals 0 to y equals square root of 1 minus x squared. And now you see how the bound for y will depend on the value of x. So what I raised, I will let you think about what is the bound for x  Now, it's a quick question.  OK, so I claim that what we'll do, so we'll write this as an I-thirty in integral, first dy, then dx, and we say, for a fixed value of x,  the range for y is from 0 to square root of 1 minus x squared. What about the range for x? Well, the range for x should just be numbers. Remember, the question I have to ask now is if I look at all of these yellow slices, which one is the first one that they want to consider, which one is the last one that they want to consider? So the smallest value of x that I want to
continue of x that I want to consider is 0 again.  And then I will have there, I will actually have a pretty
bigger slice, and I will get smaller and smaller on small, on small slices, and it stops, I have to stop when x equals 1, after all, it's does nothing else to integrate. So x goes from 0 to 1. And now, see how in the in-out integral of a bound's, depend on x, in the out-term one, you just get numbers, because the questions that you have to ask  to set a this one, and set a set of that one are different. Here, the question is, if I fix a given x, if I look at a given
sliced, what's the range for y, here, the question is, what's the first slice, what is the last slice? Does that make sense? Everyone happy with that?  we do the in-out integral, so that's integral from 0 to square root of 1 minus x squared, of 1 minus x
square minus y squared, dy, and well, that integrates to y minus x squared y minus y cubed over 3, from 0 to square root of 1 minus x squared,  and then that becomes, well, a hold of 1 minus x squared minus x squared,
hold of 1 minus x squared minus x squared minus 1 minus x squared to the 3 halves of a 3, and actually, if you look at it for long enough, c, this is 1 minus x squared times square root of 1 minus x squared.  2 of a free halves. OK, let me redo that maybe. Slightly differently, this was 1 minus x squared times y. So 1 minus x squared times y becomes square root of 1 minus x squared,  y cubed over 3, and then when I take y equals 0, I get 0, so I don't subtract anything. So now you see, this is 1 minus x squared to the 3 sub
1 minus 1 third of it, so you're left with 2 thirds. So that's the in our integral, the outer integral is integral from 0 to 1 of 2 thirds of 1 minus x squared  the x and, well, I let you see if you remember single
value value of an integral also by trying to figure out how this actually comes out to be, is it pi over 2 or pi over 8, actually.  Well, I guess we have to do it, then. I hold something on my notes, but it's not very clear. So how do we compute this thing? Why do we have to do to take a
substitute them? That's the only way I know to compute and think all like that.  square root of 1 minus x squared will be cosine of a, that we're using sine
square plus cosine square equals 1, and so that will become 2, so I mean, 2,  x squared to the 3 halves becomes cosine cubed theta, dx, if x is sine theta, then dx is cosine theta, so that's cosine theta, and if you do things, the
such a different way you do them, then you should worry about the
bound for theta, which will be 0 to pi over 2, or you can also just plug in the
bound at the end.  So now you have the 2-thirds times the integral from 0 to pi over 2 of cosine
to the 4, theta d theta, and how do you integrate that? Well, you have to use double-angle formulas.  is 1 plus cosine 2 theta over 2, and we want the square of that.  cosine 2 theta plus 1 square root of cosine square 2 theta, d theta. And how will you handle this guy, well, using again, for the whole
angle formula? So it's getting slightly nasty. So I don't know any simpler solution, except for one simpler solution, which is you have a table of integral of this form inside the notes,  I don't think so, because if you take 1 1 1, 1 1 times cosine
half times 2, you will still have 1 1 1 1, so if you do, again, for the one-angle formula, I think I'm not going to go to above or to do it, I claim you will get at the end by over 8, because I say so.  So, so exercise, continue calculating and get pi over 8.  What way to do this will be to integrate it in polar
cordinate, and that's what we'll learn how to do tomorrow.  So that will be easier in polar coordinates. So we'll see that tomorrow. So we're almost there.  to know is we can exchange the order of integration. If we have an integral given to us in the order of dy, dx, we can switch it to dx, dy, but we have to be extremely careful with the bounds.  of that. So that cannot work, it's more complicated, if you're going to be in that. So here's a first maybe example, if I do an integral from 0 to 1,
integral from 0 to 2, the x dy, I can, there I can certainly switch the bounds without thinking too much, what's the reason for that?  x from 0 to 2, and y from 0 to 1, it's a rectangle. So if I slice it this way, you see that y goes from 0 to 1 for
any x between 0 and 2, it's this guy. If I slice it that way, then x goes from 0 to 2 for any value of y between 0 and 1, and it's this one. So here it works. But in general, I have to draw a picture of my region and see how the slices look like both  of ways. So let's do a more interesting one. Let's say that I want to compute integral from 0 to 1 of integral from x to square root of x of e to the y of y, and dy dx. So why did I choose this guy?  way to integrate e to the y over y. So this n take over, you cannot compute this way. So it's a good example for y, this
can be useful. So if you do it this way, you're stuck immediately. So instead, we'll try to switch the order, but to switch the order we have to understand what do these bounds mean.  equals x to y equals square root of x, well, let's throw y equals x, and y
equals square root of x, maybe I should actually put this here, y equals x to y equals square root of x.  I will go from y equals x to y equals square root of x. And that will do that for values of x that go from x
equals 0 to x equals 1, which happens to be exactly where this thing intersect. So my region will consist of all this. So now, if I want to do it the other way around, I have to decompose my region, the other way around,  I have to, so my goal now is to verify this is an integral, well, it's still the same function, it's still e to the y over y, but now I want to
integrate d x, d y. So how do I integrate over x? Well, I fix a value of y, and for that value of y, what's the range for x? Well, the range for x is from here to here.  x equals y, this is x equals y, what about this one? x equals y squared. So x goes from y squared to y, and then what about y? I have to start at the bottom of my
rigion, that's y equals 0 to the top, which is at y equals 1. So y goes from 0 to 1.  switching the bounds is not completely obvious, that that
took a little bit of work. But now that we've done that, just to see how it goes, it's actually going to be much easier to integrate, because in our integral, what's the integral of e to the y over y, with respect to x,  to y, so that if I plug x equals y, I will get e to the y minus if I plug x equals y squared, I will get
e to the y over y times y squared, e to the y times y. So now, if I do the outer integral, I will have an integral from 0 to 1 of e to the y minus y e to the y  And that one actually is actually a little bit easier. So we know how to integrate e to the y. We don't quite know how to integrate y
e to the y, but let's try it. So let's see, what's the derivative of y e to the y? Well, by the product rule, that 1 times e to the y plus y times the derivative of e to the y  So if we do, let's put a minus sign in front, well, that's almost what we want, except we have a minus e to the y
instead of a plus e to the y, so we need to add 2 e to the y, and I claim that the anti-derivative. If you've got lust, you can also do it by integrating by parts, by taking the derivative of y and integrating this guy, or that works, just your first guess would  minus y e to the y, take the derivative of that compare, c, what you need to do to fix. So if you take that between 0 and 1, you will eventually get
e minus 2. So tomorrow, we are going to see how to do double integrals in polar coordinates and also applications of double intervals, how to use them for interesting things.