 The following content is provided under a Creative Commons license, your support will help MIT open courseware continue to offer high-quality
educational resources for free to make a donation or to view additional materials from hundreds of MIT courses, visit MIT open courseware at ocw.mit.edu.  integrals. So last week we've been doing double integers for today, we just forget all of that, but don't actually
forget it, put it away in a corner of your mind, it's going to come back next week, but what we do today, we're going to do line integrals, and these are completely different things, so it helps, actually, if you don't think of double integers at all, while doing line integrals.  what's a vector field? Well, a vector field is something that's of a form, well, it's a vector, but where M and n, the components, actually
depends on x and y, on the point where you are, so there are functions  So what that means, concretely, is that at every point in the plane, you have a vector. So in a confield at every where you have con, in a vector field,
everywhere you have a vector, that's how it works. So a good example of a vector field, I don't know if you've seen these maps that show the wind, but so here's some cool image is done by NASA.  that's a picture of a wind patterns of a coast of California with Santa Ana winds, in case you're wondering what's going on recently, so you have all of these vectors that show you the
value of the air, basically at every point.  and you draw the vectors at those points. So here's an of a pretty
major of a subset of that's a hurricane of the coast of Mexico with a winds spiraling around the hurricane.  so I guess I'll go back to the previous one, but so anyway, a vector field is something where at each point,  f, that depends on x and y. So this occurs in real life, when you look at velocity fields in a fluid, for example, the wind, that's what these
pictures show, at every point you have a velocity of a fluid  that's moving. And the example is first fields, so now first fields are not something out of star walls. If you look at gravitational attraction, you know that if you have a mass somewhere, well, it will be attracted for down because of a gravity field of the earth, which means that at every point you have a vector that's
pointing down, and same thing in space you have the gravitational field of planets, stars, and so on. So that's also an example of a vector field  so you would have that vector and what it is,
depends on where you are. So the examples from the real world, things like velocity in a fluid, are first field, where you have a first at difference on the point where you are.  the vector fields mathematically, so we want to really care what they are most of the time, but as we'll explore with them,
define quantities and so on, we'll very often use these motivations to justify why we would care about certain quantities.  let's practice drawing a few vector fields. Well, let's start with, let's say our very first vector field will be
just 2i plus j, so it's kind of a silly vector field because it doesn't actually depend on x and y, so that means it's the same vector everywhere.  to the right, 1 up, and I just put that vector everywhere. So you just put it at a few points all of the other place, and when you think you have enough so that you understand what's going on, then you stop. So here, probably, we don't need that many, I think we get the picture.  Now, let's try to look at slightly more interesting examples. Let's say I give you the vector field x times I had, so there's no j
component. So how would you throw that?  And we know that this guy is only in the I direction, so it's always
always horizontal, it doesn't have a j component, so everywhere it would be a horizontal vector. Now, the question is how long is it? Well, how long it depends on x? So for example, if x is 0, then this would be actually the 0 vector. So x is 0 that's here, c on the y axis, maybe I should take a different corner.  I actually have the 0 vector. Now, if x becomes positive small, then I will have a small
positive multiple of I, so I will be going a little bit to the right. And then if I increase x, then this guy becomes larger, so I get a longer vector to the right, if x is negative, then my vector field point  if it looks something like that. Any questions about that picture?  what the vector field does roughly, whether it's getting larger and larger, in what
direction and pointing, what have a general features. So just to do a couple more, I actually, you'll see very quickly that the examples I take in lecture are pretty much always the same ones, so we'll be playing a lot with these particular vectors fields, just because they're good examples.  So let's say I give you x i plus y j. So that one has an interesting
interesting geometric signification, the significance. If I take a point xy, so there I want to take the vector xy. How do I do that? Well, it's the same as the vector from the origin to this point. So I take this vector and I copy it so that it starts at my given point.  So it looks like that. And same thing at every point, so it's a vector field that's
pointing, radially, away from the origin, and its magnitude increases with distance from the origin.  as many as me, but so the idea is this vector field everywhere points away from the origin and its magnitude is equal
to the distance from the origin. So if this way, for example, velocity fields, well, that would tell you, you would see, visually, what's happening to your fluid, like here, maybe you have a source at the origin, that's pureing fluid out and it's flowing all the way away from that.  OK, let's do just last one. Let's say I give you minus y, x, what does that look like?  xy here. So this vector here is x, y, but the vector I want is
negative y, x. So what does that look like compared to? Yeah, it's perpendicular to the position to this vector. If I rotate this vector, so let me maybe draw a picture on the side, if I take the vector xy, then the vector with components  y and x is going to be like this, is the vector that I get by rotating by 90
decrees, counter-clockwise, why? And of course, I don't want to put the vector at the origin, I want to put it at the point xy, so in fact, what I will draw is something like this,  here, it would be like that, and if I'm closer to the origin, then it looks a bit
the same, but it's shorter, and at the origin it's 0, and when I'm further away, it becomes even larger. So this vector field, if it was the motion of a fluid, it would correspond  to a fluid that's just going around the origin in
circles, rotating at uniform speed. So this is actually the velocity field for uniform rotation. And if you figure out how long does it take for a particular  it to go all the way around, well, that will be actually 2 pi because the length of a circle is 2 pi times the radius.  that you can imagine, in lots of variations on these, of course, you can also imagine that vector fields,
even by much more complicated formulas, and then you'll have a hard time drawing them. So maybe you'll use a computer, or maybe you'll just give up and just do what have calculation you have to do without trying to visualize a vector field. But if you have a nice simple one, then it's worth doing it because sometimes it will give you insight about what we're going to compute next.  no? OK, yes, sorry. y and if it should be y and so y
c on a negative x, I think would be the other way around.  then y is positive and x is 0, so if I take y
negative x, I guess a positive first component, and 0 of a second one. So y, y,
commonegative x would be a rotation at unit speed in the opposite direction. And there's a lot of tweaks you can do to it, so if you flip the sides, you get rotation in the other direction.  How do I know that it's a unit angular
of velocity? Well, that's because if my angular velocity is 1, that means that the speed, the actual speed, is equal to the distance from the origin, because the arc length on a circle of a certain radius is equal to the radius times the angle.  if of this vector is equal to the distance from the origin, it's not obvious in the picture, but really the
vector that I put here is the same as this vector rotated, so it has the same length, so that's why the angular velocity is 1.  of things, but let's start somewhere. So one thing you might want to do with a vector field is, so I'm going to think for now of the situation where we have a false. So if you have a false, exerted on a particular, and that particular
particle moves on some trajectory, then probably you've seen  in physics that the work done by the first corresponds to the first dot product with the displacement vector, how much you have
move your particle. And of course, if you do just straight line trajectory or if the first is constant, that works well, but if you're moving on a complicated trajectory trajectory and the first keeps changing, then actually you want to integrate that over time.  So we're going to, the first thing we'll do is learn how to compute the work done by a vector field. And mathematically, that's called a line integral. So, physically, remember, the work done by a first is the first
times of distance, and more precisely,  is actually the dot product between the first and the vector, and the displacement vector for a small
motion. So say that your point is moving from here to here, you have the displacement delta R, that's just the change in the position vector, that's the vector from the old position to the new position, and then you have your first, that's being exerted, and you do the dot product  between them, and that will give you the work of the force
against this motion, and the physical significance of this, well, the work tells you basically how much energy you have to provide to actually perform this motion, just in case you haven't seen this in A2, 1 yet.  So if a first goes along the motion, it actually pushes the
particle, it provides energy to it to do that motion. And conversely, if you're trying to go against the first, then you have to provide energy to the particle to be able to do that. So in particular, if this is the only first that's taking place, then the work would be the variation in kinetic energy of a particular function along the motion.  But let's say that my particle is not just doing that, but it's doing something
complicated, and my force keeps changing, so somehow maybe I have a different force at every point. So then I want to find the total work done along the motion.  I have the first, I do the dot product, and I sum them together. And of course, the actual answer, I should actually cut into smaller and smaller pieces and sum all of the
smaller contributes to work. So in fact, it's going to be an integral.  let's call c, the trajectory for some curve, and here, the work adds up to an integral, which we've write this using the notation  an integral along c of f dot dL. So we have to decode this notation. So one way to decode this is to say it's a limit as we cut into smaller and smaller pieces of the sum of each piece of a
trijectory of the first at the given point  dot product with that small vector, along with trajectory. And well, that's not how we need to compute it. To compute it, we do things differently. So how can we actually compute it?  small time intervals, so the way that we split our trajectory is we're just taking a picture every, say, millisecond. So every millisecond we have a new
position, and the motion, the amount by which you have moved during each small time interval, is basically the
velocity of times the amount of time.  as you do the dot product between the first and how much you have
move, well, just provided this way, nothing's happened, but what this thing is actually is the velocity vector, dR dT.  I can actually compute my integral by integrating f dot product with dR dT over time from time, whatever the interval time to what have a final
times, is I integrate f dot product velocity dT.  at the point on the trajectory at time t. This guy, this guy, it depends on x and y, therefore, it
depends on t. I see a lot of confused faces. So let's do an example, and then I will ask you, OK, so now, yes, that would be probably, so here I need to put a limit as delta t,  I cut my trajectory into smaller and smaller and
smaller time intervals, for each time interval I have a small motion, which is essentially velocity times delta t, and then I dot that with a force, and I sum them.  So it's a first field that tries to make everything in the root of it somehow, your first
points along these circles, and let's say that our trajectory, our particular is moving along the parametric curve, x equals t, y equals t squared, for t going from 0 to 1.  So our vector field, whatever, and our trajectory, if you try to plot this, when you see y is actually x squared, so it's a piece of
parabolum that goes from the origin to 1, 1, that's what our curve looks like.  the R-force along this trajectory. I should point out, if you're asking me, how did you get this? That's actually a one-question. I didn't, this is all part of the
data, I have a force, and I have a trajectory, and I want to find what's the work done along that trajectory.  will be, well, it's the integral from time 0 to time 1 of f that the velocity vector, dR dT, dT, so that will be the
integral from 0 to 1 of let's try to figure it out. So what is f? f at a point xy is minus y  like, x, but if I take the point where I am at time
t, then x is t and y is t squared. So here I plug x equals t, y equals t squared, but will give me negative t squared and t. So here, we'll put negative t squared, t, dot product, what is the velocity vector?  ct is 2t, so the velocity vector is 1 and 2t, dt. So now we have to continue the calculation, we get, in terms of 0 from 0 to 1, of what is this dot product?  plus 2t squared dt, that ends up being integral from 0 to 1 of t squared dt, which you all know how to
integrate and get 1 third. So that's the work done by the first along this curve.  So in case you're wondering, things go like this.  just do evident dR. Well, soon we'll be able to, we don't know yet what dR means, so how to use it as a symbol. Because we haven't said, this is a d vector R, that's kind of a strange thing to have, and certainly R is not a useful variable.  is slightly more efficient way, but you can just use, I mean, R is not a scalar quantity, R is a
position vector, so you can't integrate f with respect to R, we don't know how to do that.  So I still can't hear you, sorry. So the question is, if I took a different trajectory from the
orgin to that point 1, 1, what would happen? Well, the answer is I would get something different. So for example, let me try to convince you of that.  that then first, I wouldn't do any work because here, the first is
perpend if you'd up to my motion, and then I would be going against the first all the way around, so I should get something that's negative.  what curve you choose? OK, any other questions? So what happens when the first inflex for trajectory? Well, then actually you would have to solve a
differential equation, then you have a particular move  to find what the trajectory is. So that's something that would be a very useful topic, and that's probably more like what you will do in 18 of Rays, or maybe you
know how to do it in this case. So what we're trying to develop here is a method to figure out if we know what the trajectory is, what the work will be, it doesn't tell us what the trajectory will be, but of course, we could also find that.  Article is moving just based on that first, maybe actually I'm here to hold it in my hand and
force it to go where it's going, or maybe there's some rail that's taking it on that trajectory or whatever. So I can't really do it along any trajectory. And if I wanted to, if I knew that it's the case, and I could try to find the trajectory based on what the first is, but that's not what we're doing here.  next. OK, so let's try to make sense when you asked, if y to go, and just a few minutes ago, what can we do directly with dR? So dR c becomes somehow a vector, when I replace it by dR dT times dT, it becomes something that's a vector, but with dT next to it.  Well, it's not really new, but let's see, another way to do it, let's say that our first has components M and n. I claim that we can write symbolically, vector dR stands for, it's a vector with
components, Rdx and dy.  kind of vector, I mean, it's not a real vector, of course, but as a notation, it's a
precertain good notation, because it tells us that f that dR is m dx plus n dy. And so, in fact, we'll very often, by instead of f that dR, 9 integral, c, will  plus n dy. And so in this language, of course, what we're integrating now, Roverb and a vector field becomes a
differential, but you should think of it as being pretty much the same thing. It's like when you compare the gradient function and it's differential, they're different annotations, but they have the same content. So now, that still remains the question, how do we compute this kind of interval? Because it's more subtle than the notation suggests.  because M and n, both depend on x and y. And if you just integrate it with respect to x, you'd be left with y is in
there, and you don't want to be left with y, you want a number at the end. And see, the catch is along the curve, x and y are actually related to each other. So whenever we write this, we have two variables x and y, but in fact, along the curve c, we have only one parameter, could be x, could be y  I could be time, whatever you want, but we have to actually express everything in terms of
that one parameter, and then we get a usual single variable integral. So how do we evaluate things in this language?  So the method to evaluate is to x plus
x plus  x and y in terms of a single variable, and then substitute that variable. So let's, for example, redo the one we had there, just using these new notation, you'll see it's the same
calculation that with different notation.  in that example that we had, our vector-filled f was negative y, x, so what we're integrating is
negative y dx plus x dy. And see, if we have just this, we don't know how to integrate that.  a negative xy or something like that, but that actually doesn't make sense, it doesn't work. So what we'll do is we'll actually have to express everything in terms of a same variable, because it's a single integral, we should have a new one variable, and what that variable will be, well, if we just do it the same way, that
would just be t.  So how do we express everything in terms of t? Well, we use the parametric equation. We know that x is t and y is t squared. So we know what to do with these two guys, what about dx and dy? Well, it's easy, which is differentiate. dx becomes dt, dy becomes 2t dt.  I'm just saying in a different language, what I say of a value with dx dt equals 1, dy dt equals 2t, it's the same thing, but
but it's slightly differently. So now, so I'm going to do it again, I'm going to switch from 1 about to the next one, my integral becomes the integral over c of negative y is minus d squared dt,  just x is t times dy is 2t dt. And now that I have only t left, it's fine to say, oh, I have a usual single variable
value of a variable t that goes from 0 to 1. So now I can say, yes, this is the integral from 0 to 1 of that stuff, well, I can simplify a bit,  and I can compute it. I have negative t squared, and then I have plus 2t squared, so I
end up with positive t squared, it's the same as up there.  dy, dy is the derivative of y, it's the
definition of y, y is t squared, so I get 2t dt. So I plug dt for dx, I plug 2t dt for dy, and so on. And that's the general method. So if you are given a curve, then you first have to figure out how do you express x and y in terms of a same thing?  you choose to parameterize your curve in what
everywhere you want. So the note that I want to make is that this line integral depends on the trajectory c  but not on the parameterization. So you can choose whichever variable you want. So for example, what you could do is when you know that you have a trajectory, you could also choose to
parameterize it as x equals sine theta, and  and y equals sine square theta, because y is x squared, where theta goes from 0 to pi over 2, and then you could get dx and dy in terms of d theta, and you would be able to do it with a lot of
trigger and you would get the same answer. So that would be a harder way to get the same thing. So what you should do in practice is use the most reasonable way to parameterize your  If you know that here, you have a piece of
parable, y equals x squared, there's no way you will put sine and sine squared. You could set, I mean, x equals t, y equals t squared is very reasonable. You can even take a small shortcut and say that your variable will be just x. So that means x, you just keep it as it is, and then when you have y, you set y equals x squared, dy equals 2x, dx, and then you have an integral of x, that works.  this one is not practical, but you get to choose.  So now let me tell you a bit more about the geometry.  always do this, try to find a parameter, the simplest one, x plus everything in terms of that
value, and then you have an integral to compute. But sometimes you can actually say a lot of work by just thinking geometrically about what this all does.  of 1st is what is this vector dR? Well, what is vector delta R? If I take a very small piece of a
projectory, then my vector delta R will be tangent to the trajectory. So it will be going in the same direction as a unit tangent vector, t, and what is its length, well, it's length, is the R-clanth along the trajectory,  which is what we called delta S. Remember, S was this time, so
on the trajectory. So we can write vector dR, so we say it's dx, dy, but that's also t times dS. It's a vector whose direction is tangent to the curve and whose length element is actually the R-clength element  I mean, if you don't like this notation, think about divide everything by dT, then what we're saying is dR dT, that's a velocity vector, well, in coordinates, a velocity vector is dx dT, dy dT, but more geometrically, the direction of a velocity vector is tangent to the
projectory and its magnitude is speed  ds dg. So that's really the same thing. So if I say this, that means that my line integral of f that dR, well, I say that I can write it as
interval of m dx plus and dy, that's what I will do if I want  to actually compute it by computing the integral, but if in step I want to think about it
geomitrically, I could rewrite it as f dot t ds. So now you can think of this, f dot t is a scalar quantity. It's the tangent component of my force, so I take my force and I project it to the tangent direction to the trajectory, and then I integrate that along the curve.  it's tell the same thing. And sometimes it's easier to do it this way. So here's an example, let's say, so this is bound to be easier only when the field and the curve are relatively simple and have a
geometric relation to each other. If I give you an equal formula with x cubed plus y to the fifth or whatever, there's a little chance that you will be able  let's say that my trajectory is just a circle of radius a center that the origin, let's say I'm
doing that counterclockwise, and let's say that my vector field is x i plus y g. So what does that look like?  So my trajectory is just this circle, my vector field, remember, xI plus y, j, that's the 1 that's
pointing, right, from the origin. So hopefully if you have good physics intuition here, you already know what the work is going to be, it's going to be 0, because the first is  Now, we can say it directly by saying, well, if we take any point of a circle, if you have any point of a circle, then the tangent vector to the
circle will be tangent, well, it's tangent to the circle, so that means it's perpendicular to the radial direction, while the first is pointing  So you have a right angle between them. So f is perpendicular to t, so f that t is 0, and the line integral of f that t, ds, is just 0.  x equals a cosine y equals a sine theta, we get a
a bunch of trig things, it cancels out to 0. It's not much harder, but we saved time by not even thinking about how to parameterize things.  negative yI plus x j. So that means along my circle, the tangent vector goes like this. And my vector field is also going around, so in fact, at this point,  will also be going in the same direction. So now, f is actually parallel to the
tension direction, so that means that the dot product f dot t, remember, that's the component of f in this direction, that will be the same as the length of f, but what's the length of f on this circle  if this radius is a, it's just going to be a, that's what we say
the earlier, but this vector field. So at every point, this dot product is a, now we know how to integrate f  we can take it out. And now, what do we get when we integrate ds
along c? Well, we should get the total length of a curve, if we sum all the little pieces of our length, that we know that the length of a circle of radius a is 2 pi a, so we get 2 pi a squared.  we do, with set, so we would be computing the integral of
minus y dx plus x dy, we'd probably set, since we're on a circle, x equals a equals a, y equals a sine theta, for theta between 0 and 2 pi. So then we would get dx and dy out of b's, so y is a sine theta, dx is negative a  sine theta, d theta, if you differentiate a cosine plus a
cos theta, a cos theta, d theta, well, you'll just end up with integral from 0 to 2 pi of a squared times sine square theta plus cosine square theta, d theta, that becomes just 1, and you get the same answer. It took about the same amount of time because I did this one
was  about at least twice the amount of time to do it with a
calculation so that tells you sometimes it's worth thinking