 The following content is provided under a Creative Commons Commons license, your support will help MIT open courseware continue to offer high-quality
educational resources for free to make a donation or to view additional materials from hundreds of MIT courses, visit MIT open courseware at ocw.mit.edu.  how to actually decide whether a particular point is a minimum, a minimum, a
minimum, a maximum or a set of points, so that's the main topic for today. So remember, yesterday, we looked at critical points of functions of several variables, and so a critical point of a function say of two  that's a point where the partial derivatives are both 0. And we've seen that there's
value of the other two points, there's local minimum, so maybe I should show the function and its contour plot, there's local maximum, which are like that, and there's  points, which are n if or minimum or
minimum or max, and of course, if you have a real function, then it will be more complicated, it will have several critical points. So this example here, where you see on the plot that there's 2 max, and there's in the middle between them,  And actually, you can see them on the control plot, on the control plot, you see the
maxima, because the level curves become circles that now down and shrink to the maximum, and you can see the saddle point, because here you have this level curve that makes a figure 8, it crosses itself, and if you move up or down here, then, along the y direction, the value of a function will  increase. So you can see, usually, quite easily, where are the critical points just by looking either
at the graph or at the counterplot? So the only thing with the counterplot is you need to rate the values to tell a minimum from a maximum, because the counterplot looks the same, just, in one case, the
value is increasing, and if I want to be  Question, is how do we decide between the various possibilities, so local minimum, local maximum, or saddle point?  So, in fact, why do we care? Well, the other question is, how do we find the global minimum or
minimum or maximum of a function?  So here, what I should point out, first of all, to decide where the function is the
leantest, in general, you'll have actually to compare the values, for example, here, if you want to know what is the maximum of this function, well, we have two obvious candidates, we have this local maximum and that local maximum, and the question is which one is the higher of the two, in this case, there are
exactly tied for maximum.  in general, you would have to compute the function at both points and
compare the values if you know that it's free at 1 of M and 4 at the other, well, 4 wins. The other thing that you see here is if you're looking for the minimum of this function, well, the minimum is not going to be at any of the critical points. So where's the minimum, what it looks like the minimum is actually out there on the boundary or at infinity. So the 10-over feature of a
future of a global minimum or minimum or maximum doesn't have to be at a critical point.  be somehow on the side, in some limit-and-situation, where one variable
stopps being in the allowed range of values or goes to infinity. So we have to actually check the boundary and the infinity behavior of our function to know where, actually, the minimum and maximum  either at a critical point or on the boundary or at infinity. So by that I mean, on the boundary of a domain of definition that we are considering, and so we have to try both.  get back to that, for now, let's try to focus on the question of what's the
type of the critical point? So we'll use something that's known as the second derivative test.  namely function of 1 variable, if a derivative is 0, then you know that you should look at the
second derivative, and that will tell you whether it's curving up or down, whether you have a local max and the local min. And the main problem here is, of course, we have more possible situations, and we have several derivatives, so we have to think a bit harder about how we'll decide, but it will again, again, involve the second derivatives.  that will be useful to us because it will provide the
basis for the general method. So we are first going to consider a case where we have a function that's actually just quadratic. So let's say I have a function w of xy, but so the form a x squared plus b, xy plus cy squared.  the origin, because if you take the derivative with respect to x, and if you plug x equals y equals y equals 0, you'll get 0, and
same with respect to y. You can also see if you try to do a linear approximation of this, well, all of these guys are much smaller than x and y when x and y are small, so the linear approximation, the tangent plane to the graph, is where it  yesterday, which it did an example, it was a bit more
complicated than that, but let me do it. So remember, we were looking at something that started with x squared plus 2xy plus 3y squared, and there were overterms, but let's forget them now. And what we did is we said, well, we can rewrite this as x plus y squared plus 2y squared, and now this is a sum of  two squares, so each of these guys has to be non-negative, and so the origin
will be a minimum. Well, the answer out we can do something similar in general, no matter what these values of a, b, and c are, we'll just try to first first complete things to a square.  let me assume that a is non-zero because otherwise I can't do what I'm going to do. So I'm going to write this as a times x squared plus b over a, xy, then I have my cy squared. And now this looks like the beginning of the
square of something, just like what we did  over over. So what is at the square of, well, you'd start with x plus, and claim if I
put B over 2a times y, and I square, then the term, the cross term 2 times x times b over 2a, y will become b over axy.  as do I get, well, I get b squared over 4a squared times a, so I get b squared over 4a y squared. And I want, in fact, c times y squared. So the number of y squared that I should add is c minus b squared over 4a.  b over 2a times 2y, that's going to be maybe xy, but I also get b squared over 4a squared, y squared times a, that's b squared over 4a, y squared, and that canceles out with this guy here, and then I will be left with cy squared.  maybe I'll do it just to convince you. So if I expand this, I will get a times, let me put that in a different
color because you shouldn't write that down, it's just to convince you again.  2, x be over 2a, y, well, the 2a's cancel out, we get b, xy, plus a times the square of that, it's going to be b squared over 4a squared, y squared, plus cy squared, minus b squared over 4a, y squared, here, the a, and the a  And now, these two terms simply if I, and give me just cy squared in the end, and that's kind of unredible, I've canceled every thing, but if you follow it, you see that, basically, I've just favorite my
initial function.  the other set of M of R8. So let me continue to play with this. So I'm just going to put this in a slightly
different form just to clear the denominator. So I will, instead, write this as 1 over 4a times the big thing.  plus a squared times x plus b over 2a, y squared, so so far I have the same
thing as here, I just introduced for a that cancels out, plus for the other one, I'm just clearly in the denominator, I end up with 4ac minus b squared y squared, so that's a lot of terms,  But what does it look like? Well, it looks like, so we have some constant
factors, and here we have a square, and here we have a square, a square. So basically, we've written this as a sum of two squares.  the function will always take non-negative values, so the origin
will be a minimum. Why, if you have a difference of two squares, then typically you'll have a saddle point because, depending on whether one of the other is larger, you'll have a positive or a negative quantity.  So in fact, that claim that we'll be three cases, and that's good news for us, because after all, we want to distinguish between
3 possibilities. So let's first do away with a most complicated one, what if for a c minus b squared is negative?  So the first guy is obviously a positive quantity, while the second one will be something
negative times y squared, so it will be a negative quantity. So one term is positive, b of L is negative, that tells us we actually have a saddle point.  with, in fact, for a right-and-out function, a function as a
difference of two squares, is that convincing? So if you want what I could do, what I could do is actually, I could change my coordinates, have a new coordinate, I don't know, u equals x plus b over 2a, y, and b, actually, what I could keep y, and then it would look like a difference of squares directly.  the first case. The second case is where for ac minus b squared equals 0. Well, what happens if that's 0, then it means that this term of L goes away. So what we have is just 1 squared. So what that means is actually that our function  in one direction of things. In the other direction, it's going to
actually be degenerate. So for example, for the forget-alverclutter in there, say I give you just the function of two variables, w equals just x squared. So that means it doesn't depend on y at all, and if I try to plot the graph, it will look, well, so x is here, so it will depend  x in that way, but it doesn't depend on y at all, so what the graph looks like is something like that. Basically, it's a value whose bottom is
completely flat, so that means, actually, we have a degenerate critical point, it's called degenerate, because there's a direction in which nothing happens, and in fact,  take all points everywhere along the y-axis. So now, whether the square that we have is x or something
gives x plus b over to a, y, it doesn't matter. I mean, it will still get this degenerate behavior that there's a direction in which nothing happens, because we just have the square of 1 quantity.  So I'm sure that f of a 1 by 2n on c, that's means f of a
100 different ringtones, but I'm not eager to hear all of them.  So basically, we'll leave it here, we want to try to figure out
out further what happens, and the reason for that is that when you have an actual function, a general function, not just one that's quadratic like this, then there will actually be overterms, maybe involving higher powers, maybe x cubed or y cubed, or things like that, and then they will mess up what happens in this value, and it's a situation where we want to be  actually to tell, but automatically just by looking at
second derivatives, what happens? See, for example, in the function of 1 variable, if you have just a function of 1 variable, say f of x equals x to the 5, well, if you try to decide what type of point the origin is, you're going to take the second derivative, it will be 0, and then you can conclude, because things depend on higher or other derivatives.  want to try to figure out what's going on here. Now, the last situation is if for a, c minus b
square is positive. So then that means that, actually, with written things, the big bracket up there is a sum of two squares.  of L4a times plus something squared plus something
gett squared. So these guys have the same sign, and that means that this term here will always be greater or equal to 0. And so that means that we should have either a maximum or a minimum, how do we decide which one it is?  So that's two sub cases, one is if a is positive, then this quantity of a
ol will always be non-negative, and that means we have a minimum.  to apply this positive positive quantity by a negative number, we get something that's always
negative, so 0 is actually the maximum.  setting the example, w equals x square, it doesn't depend on y. So the marginal situation is, w equals some constant,
I guess it's a times x plus b over 2, a times y squared. So it does depend on x and on y, but it only depends on this combination. So if I choose to move in somehow the perpendicular direction, in the direction of where this  set x equals minus b over 2y, then this remains 0 over time. So there's a digitarily direction in which I
stay at the minimum or maximum or what the value of it is that I have.  a very good question. So I say this is going to be the second-direction test, why do we not have
their relatives yet? Well, that's because I've been looking at this special example where we have a function like this, and so I don't actually need to take derivatives yet, but that's c, because a, b, and c will be the second derivatives of a function, actually, 2, a, b, and 2c.  So here, I'm basically setting the stage for what will be the actual
crytale and will use using second derivatives. So when you have a degenerate critical point, it could be a degenerate minimum or a degenerate maximum, depending on the sign of a. But in general, once you start having more complicated functions, you don't really know what will happen.  So we want to really be able to tell. Yes?  see it here because that doesn't happen if you have only
qualertic terms like that, you need to have higher order terms to see it happen.  quantity for ac minus b squared, you've probably seen that before in your life. Yeah, it looks like the quadratic formula, except that when
involves b squared minus for ac, but that's really the same thing. So let's see, where does the quadratic formula come in here?  So with manipulated things, and
get into a conclusion, let me just do a different manipulation and write this, now instead, as y squared times a times x over y squared plus b x over y plus c, that's the same thing that I had before.  what it is here is always not negative, what about this one? Well, of course, this one depends on x over y, which
depends on which direction you're going to move away from the origin, which ratio between x and y you will consider. But I claim there's two situations.  And it means that this has a roots, this has solutions. And that means that this point it can be both positive and negative.  is just 2, you know, plus a, it is square plus bt plus c, you know that there's two roots, so it
might look like this, or it might look like that, depending on the sign of a, but in either case, it will take values of both sides. So that means that your function will take values of both sides.  the value of the
take's both positive and negative values, and so that means we have a saddle point, while the over situation, when b squared minus 4ac is negative,  means that this equation, this quadratic never takes the value 0, so it's always positive, or it's always negative
depending on the sign of a. So the other case is if b squared minus 4 ac is negative, then that quadratic doesn't have a solution, and it could look like this or like that, depending on whether a is positive or a is negative,  So in particular, that means a x over y squared plus b, x over y plus c is always positive, or always negative, depending on the sign of a. And then that tells us that our function, double, you will be always positive, positive, or
always negative, and then we'll get a minimum or a maximum  So that's another way to derive the same answer. And now here you see why for this
cremion and plays a role, that's because it exactly tells you whether of its quadratic quantity has always the same  or whether I can actually cost the value 0 when you have a
root of a quantity of a quantity. So hopefully, at this stage, you're happy with one of the two explanations, at least, and now you're willing to believe, I hope, that we have basically a way of deciding what type of critical point  in the special case of a quadratic function.  Now, what do we do with a general function? Well, so in general, we want to look at
second derivatives. So now we are getting to the real stuff. So how many second derivatives do we have?  Well, we can take the derivative first with respect to x, and then, again, with respect to x. That gives us something we did not by
partial square f of L, a function x squared, or f sub xx.  derivative with respect to x, and then with respect to y, another thing you can do is do first
the derivative respect to y, and then with respect to x, that would be f sub yx. Well, good news, these are actually always equal to each other.  We don't need to worry about which one we do, that's one computation, that we want to do, we can save a bit of f of L. And then we have the last one, namely the second
partial, we respect to y and y, f sub y, yy.  what does the second derivative test say? It says, say that you have a critical point, x0, y0 of a function of 2
value of 2, y equals f,  And then let's compute the partial derivatives. So let's call capital A, the second derivative
respect to x, let's call capital B, the second derivative we respect to x and y, and c equals f sub yy, y, y at this point. So these are just numbers because we first compute the second derivative  and then we plug in the values of x and y at the
creditable point, so this will just be numbers. And now what we do is we look at the quantity ac minus b squared. I am not forgetting, a 4, you will see why there is.  then there's two sub cases, if a is positive, then it's a local minimum.  a, c minus b squared is
negative, then it's a several point, and finally, if ac minus b squared is 0, then we actually cannot conclude.  So we know it's degenerate in some way, but we don't know what type of point it is. So that's actually what you need to remember if you're formula-oriented, that's all you need to remember about today.  I really want to keep this middle board, because it actually has the recipe that we've found before for the quadratic function. So let me move
the way of Lver and try to relate our old recipe with a new one.  OK, you're easily amused.  So let's verify in the special case where the function was a x squared plus bxy plus cy squared.  x and x, so first I want to take the derivative of respect to x, let's take first, first, the first
partial, w sub x, that will be 2 ax plus by. So the value of x x, well, let's take the partial respect to x again, but 2a, w sub xy, I take the partial respect  b. Now, we need also the partial respect to y, so w sub y is bx plus 2cy, in case you don't believe what I told you about the mixed
passions, w sub yx, well, you can check, and it's, again, b, so there, indeed, the same thing, and w sub yy, yy will be 2c.  So if we now look at this point it is, that tells us, well, big a is 2 little a, big b is little b, big c is 2 little c. So ac minus b squared is what we use to call for little ac minus b squared.  So now you can compare the cases, well, they're not less than
the same order, just to make it harder. So we said first, if the subtle case is when ac minus b squared in big letters is negative, that's the same as for ac minus b squared in lower case is negative, the case where capital ac minus  b square is positive, local min and local max corresponds to this one, and the case where we can't conclude was what
use to be the digitarily one. So at least we don't seem to have messed up when copying the formula. Now, why does that work more generally even?  Taylor approximation. So let me just do here, quadratic approximation. So quadratic approximation tells me the following thing. It tells me if I have a function f of xy,  And they want to understand the change in f when I change x and y a little bit, well, the first
other terms, that's the linear terms, but by now you should know and be comfortable with, that's f sub x times the change in x, then there's f sub y times the change in y.  x and y, sorry, if we are at a critical point, then that's going to be 0 at a
critical point. So that term actually goes away, and that's also 0 at the critical point, so that term also goes away. So linear approximation is really no good, we need more terms.  the next terms are quadratic terms. And so, I mean, if you remember, the Taylor formula, for a function of a single
value variable, there was the derivative times x minus x0 plus 1 1 1 1 half of the second derivative times x minus x0 squared, and so this side here is really Taylor approximation in one variable looking only at x. But of course, we also have terms involving y and
and terms involving
simultaneously, x and y.  and these terms f sub xy times changing x times changing y plus 1 1 1 1 half of fyy y times y minus y0 squared. There's no 1 1 1 1 1 half in the middle because, in fact, you would have two terms, 1 for xy, 1 for yy, 1 for yx, but they're the same. And then if you want to continue, there's actually cubic terms involving the third
dereatives and so on, but we're not  but actually looking at them. And so now, when we do this approximation, the type of critical point remains the same when we replace the function by this approximation. And so we can apply the argument that we used to use things in the
equalistic case, in fact, it still works in the general case using this approximation formula.  So the general case reduces two of the quadratic case.  Now, this coefficient, which we use to call little a, is also 1 1 1 1 of capital A. And same here, this
quafation is what we call capital B or little b, and this coefficient here is what we called little c, 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 of capital c.  Various cases that we had here, you end up with a
second derivative test. So what about the degenerate case? Why can't we just say, well, it's going to be a degenerate critical point? So the reason is that this approximation formula is reasonable only if the higher-order terms are negligible. So in fact, secretly, there's more terms, this is an in-approximation, there would be terms involving third derivatives  and maybe even beyond that. And so in the non-degenerated case, they don't actually matter because the shape of a function, the
shaper for the graph is actually determined by the quadratic terms. But in the degenerate case, if I start with this, and they add something even very, very, very small, along the y-axis, then that can be enough to bend this very slightly up or slightly down, and turn my degenerate point into either a minimum or a  And I won't be able to tell until I go further in the
list of derivatives. So in the degenerate case, what actually happens depends on the higher  So we need to analyze things more carefully, well, we are not going to buffer with that in this class. So we'll just say, well, we cannot conclude.  Well, if that happens, then what you should do is maybe try by inspection, c, there's a good reason why the function should always be positive or
always be negative or something, or plot it on a computer and see what happens, but otherwise we can't conclude.  So probably, you should leave this on so that we still have the test with us, and instead, so I'll do my example here.  So let's do an example.  x plus y plus 1 of L, xy, where x and y are positive. So I'm looking at the first
quadrant. I mean, I'm doing this because I don't want this denominator to become 0, so I'm just looking at that situation. So let's look first, so the question will be what are the minimum and the maximum of this function?  to handle to answer this question, is look for critical points. So for that, we have to compute the first derivatives.  x squared y, take the derivative of 1 over x, but
negative 1 over x squared, and we'll want to set that equal to 0. And f sub y is 1 minus 1 over x squared, and we want to set that equal to 0. So what are the equations we have to solve?  S, x squared y equals 1, if I get this, if I move this guy over here, I get 1 of x squared y
y equals 1, that's x squared y equals 1, and xy squared equals 1. What do you get by comparing these two?  x equals y, and then if x equals y, then if I put that into here, it will give me y
cubes equals 1, which tells me y equals 1, and therefore x equals 1 as well. So there's only one solution, there's only one critical point, which is going to be 1, 1, 1.  So now, here's where you do a bit of work, whether you think of that
critical point.  maybe, well, you haven't computed the second
the second derivative yet. Yes, I see someone giving the correct answer, I see some people not giving quite the correct answer, I see more and more correct answers.  to x 2 of x cubed y. So at our point, a will be 2. f sub xy will be 1 of x squared y squared.  f sub yy, y is going to be 1 over xy cubed, so c will be 2, and so that
tells us, well, ac minus b squared is 4 minus 1, so I should probably use a different  ac minus b squared is 2 times 2 minus 1 squared is free, is positive, but that's us, we are, if a local minimum or a
local maximum, and a is positive, so it's a local minimum. And in fact, we can check it's the global minimum, what about the maximum?  at a critical point, it's on the boundary or at infinity. So we have to check what happens when x and y go to 0 or go to infinity. If x, y goes to infinity, then the
function goes to infinity.  or x and y go to 0. So it's not at a particular point. So in general, we have to check both the
critical points and the boundaries to decide what happens.