 The following content is provided under a Creative Commons Commons Commons license, your support will help MIT open courseware continue to offer high-quality educational resources for free to make a donation or to view
additional materials from hundreds of MIT courses, visit MIT open courseware at ocw.mit.edu.  And so, for example, we so that if we have a function that
depends, sorry, on three variables x, y, z, that x, y, z themselves depend on some variable t, then you can find a formula for dw, dt, by writing down w sub x  dx dt plus w sub y dy dt plus w sub z, dz dt, and the meaning of that formula is that, well, the change in w is closed by changes in x, y and z, xy and z change at the x dt, dy, d, y, dt, dz, and this goes is the function to change, accordingly,
using the terms of a partial derivative  tell you how sensitive the value is to change
in each variable. So we are going to just provide write this in a new notation, so I'm going to write this in a more concise form as gradient of w, that product with a velocity vector, dR dT, where  the gradient of w is a vector formed by putting together all of the partial derivatives. So it's the vector with
components of the partials, and of course, it's a vector that depends on x, y, and z.  of the w at some point, xyz. So at each point, it gives you a vector, that actually is what we will call a vector field, that we'll get back to that
later. And dR dT is just a velocity vector, dx dT, dy dT,  dzity. So the new definition for today is the definition of a gradient vector, and our goal will be to understand a bit better, what does this
bector mean, what does it measure, and what can we do with it? But you see that in terms of information content, it's really the same information that's already in the partial  or in the different form. So, yes, and I should say, of course, you can also use the gradient in other things like approximation,
formulas and so on. So far, it's just notation, it's a way to rewrite things.  So I claim that the gradient vector is perpendicular to the
level surface corresponding to setting the function w equal to a constant.  So say, have a function of two variables x and y, then maybe it has some
contorplot, and I'm saying if I take the gradient of a function at this point xy, so I will have a vector, well, if I draw a vector on top of a control plot, it's going to end that being perpendicular to the level curve at this point.  because the control plot would be leading in space with x, y and z, but it would be a bunch of
level surfaces, and the gradient vector would be a vector in space, that vector is perpendicular to the level surfaces. So let's try to see that a couple of examples. So let's do a first example, let's do things, what's the easiest case,  let's take a linear function of x, y and z. So I will take w equals a1 times x plus a2 times y plus a3 times c.  a, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b,
and b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b,  And we know how to find a normal vector to this plane, just by looking
at the coefficients, so it's a plane with a normal vector, exactly this gradient. And in fact, in a way, this is the only case you need to check because of linear approximation.  replace the level of surfaces by the attention
plains, and then you will actually end up in this situation, but maybe that's not very convincing.  because that way I will be able to draw a picture for you. So what are the level sets of this function? Well, they're going to be circles, right?  So the control plot looks something like that. Now, what's the gradient vector? Well, the gradient of this function, so partial w
puffful x is 2x, and partial w, you're partial y is 2y. So let's say I take a point x, y,  and I try to draw my gradient vector, so here at xy, so I have to draw a vector 2x, 2y, what does it look like?  an equivalent to this circle. So it's a general
eval feature, which you let me show you more examples, not the one I want. So I don't know if you can see it, so hopefully you can. So here I have a control plot of a function, and I have a blue vector, that's the gradient vector at the pink point on the plot.  for a pink point, and the gradient vector of course,
changes because the gradient depends on x and y, but what doesn't change is that it's always perpendicular to the level curves.  So, so we have a lot of evidence, but let's try to prove a theorem, because it will be interesting.  Ah, very good question. Does the gradient vector, why is the gradient vector, the
continuous in one direction of a, or in the other? So we'll see the answer to that in a few minutes, but let me just tell you immediately, to decide which side it's pointing to, it's always pointing towards higher values of a function, and we'll see that maybe in about 1 1 1 1 1.  points towards higher values of the value of the value of the value.  that just yet, that will come in a while. So maybe we want to understand first what happens if we move inside the
level curve. So let's imagine that we are taking a moving point that stays on the level curve or on the level surface. And then we know what happens is that the function stays constant.  But we can also know how quickly the function of
changes using the chain-hole up there. So maybe the chain-hole will actually be the key to understanding how the gradient vector and the motion on the level surface relate.  inside, maybe I should say, on the
ver-level surface, the value equals c. So let's think about what that means. So just to get you used to this idea, I'm going to draw a level surface of a function of free variable, so it's some surface, given by the equation,  x, y, g equals some constant c. And so now I'm going to have a point on that, and it's going to move on that
surface. So I will have some parametric curve that lives on this surface. So the question is, what's going to happen at any given time?  what can I say about the velocity vector of this movement? It's going to be tangent to the
ver-level surface, if I move on a surface, then at any point my velocity is tangent to the curve, but if it's tangent to the curve, then it's also tangent to the surface, because the curve is inside the surface.  So I have my level of the b of
sub n equals c, I have a curve and that, and at some point, I'm going to have a certain  b equals dR dT is tangent to the
level, the value of w equals c, because it's tangent to the curve, and the curve is inside the level.  is. So by the chain rule, we have dw, dt, so the rate of change of the value of the value as I move along this curve is given by the dot product between the gradient and the velocity vector.  And so for maybe I can rewrite it as, nablet,
w, sorry, delta, w, dot, v, and what should it be? What happens to the value of w as t changes? Well, it stays constant because we are moving on a curve that can of maybe complicated, but it stays always  of a level, w equals c. So it's 0 because w of t equals c, which is a constant. Is that convincing? So now, if we have a dot product that's 0, that tells us that these two guys are perpendicular.  So the gradient vector is perpendicular to V. OK, that's a good start. We know that the gradient is perpendicular to this
vector, that's tangent to the level of a-level surface, what about other vectors? Attention to the level of a-level surface? Well, in fact, I could use a-near curve drawn on the
value of a,  So I could move really, anyway, anyway, I wanted on that
surface, in particular, I claim that I could have chosen my velocity vector to be any vector tangent to the surface.  the level of the surface, the value of the
w equals c. So that means that means the can be any vector tangent to the surface, attention to the level c, for example,  So I have my level of the surface, so I'm drawing more and more and more
levels, and I never quite loop the same, but I have a point, and at this point, I have the tangent plane to the level of surface, this is tangent plane, to the level, then if I choose any vector  in that tangent plane, let's say I choose, no, for when that goes in that direction, then I can actually find a curve that goes in that
direction and stays on the level. So here, that would be a curve that somehow goes from the right to the left, and of course, it has to end up going up or something like that.  to vector tangent, let's call that vector
v, tangent to the level, we get that the gradient is perpendicular to the, so the gradient is perpendicular to this vector, tangent to this curve, but also to any vector I can draw that tangent to my surface.  means the gradient is actually perpendicular to the tangent plane or to the
surface at this point. So the gradient is perpendicular.  And well, here, I've illustrated things with a free-dimensional example, but really it works the same if you have only two
variables, when you have a level curve, it has a tangent line, and the gradient is perpendicular to that line.  So let's see, that's actually pretty pretty neat because there's a nice
application of this, which is to try to figure out now we know actually how to find a tangent plane to anything pretty much.  So let's say that, for example, I want to find  2, the surface with equation, let's say x squared plus y squared minus z squared equals 4, at the point 2, 1, let me write that.  So how do we do that? Well, one way that we already know, if we solve this for z, so we can write
z equals function of x and y, then we know tangent plane approximation for the graph of a function z equals some function of x and y. But that doesn't look like it's the best way to do it.  the normal vector will just be the gradient. I think I have a
cool picture of the show, so that's what it looks like. So here you have the surface x squared plus y squared minus z squared equals 4, that's called a hyperboloid, because it looks like what you get when you spin a hyperbola around the axis.  So it doesn't look very attention because it crosses the surface, but if you think about it, you'll see that it's really a claim that
approximating the surface in the best way that you can at this given point.  how you would look for it in the first place, so the way to do it is that we compute the gradient, so the gradient of what?  minus g squared. And so we know that the gradient of this, well, what is it? 2x, then 2y, and then negative 2z. So at this given point, I guess we add x equals 2, so that's 4, and then ynz1,  to a negative 2. And that's going to be the normal vector to the surface or to the tangent plane. And that's one way to define the tangent plane, it has the same
normal vector as the surface. That's when we define the normal vector to the surface, if you prefer, being perpendicular to the surface means that your perpendicular  So the equation is, well, for x plus 2y minus 2z equals something, where we should just plug in that point,
will get a plus 2 minus 2, looks like we'll get 8. And of course, we could simplify by dividing everything by 2,  very important here. So now, if you have a surface given by an equal
equation and the point on the surface, well, you know how to find the tangent plane to the surface at that point.  So I claim, in fact, we could have done this without the gradient, using the gradient
in somehow a disguised way. So here's another way. So the other way to do it would be to start with a differential, dw, well, it's pretty much the same content, but let me write it as a differential, dw is 2x dx,  minus S i plus 2y, plus 2y dy minus 2z dz. So at the given point, at 2101, this is for dx plus 2y minus 2dz. Now, if we want to change this into an approximation
of the formula we can, we know that the change in w  is approximately equal to 4 delta x plus 2 delta y minus 2 delta z. So when do we stay on the level of a-level surface, when we stand at a
evalveral surface, when w doesn't change, so when this becomes 0? Now, what does this approximation sign mean?  this guy will be close to that guy. It also means something else. Remember, this approximation
of formulas, they are linear approximation, they mean that we replace the function, by some closed-st, linear formula that will be nearby. And so in particular, if we set this equal to 0 instead of
approximately 0, it means we'll actually be moving on the tangent plane to the level set.  that we replace the function by its tangent
approximation.  OK, so the level corresponds to delta 2 equals 0, and its tangent plane  plus 2 delta y minus 2 delta z equals 0, that's what I'm trying to say, basically. And what's delta x? Well, that means it's the change in x. So what's the change in x here? That means when we started with x equals 2, and we move to some over value x. So that's actually x minus 2. That's how much x has changed compared to 2.  times y minus 1, minus 2 times z minus 1 equals 0. That's the equation of attention plane. It's the same equation as the 1 of L of L, these are just two
different methods to get it. So this one explains to you what's going on in terms of approximation formulas, this one goes right away to the answer by using the gradient  So in a way, with this one, you don't have to think, not only as much, but you can use either one.  is direction or derivative. So let's say that we have a function of two
value of x and y, well, we know how to compute partial the value of
value of partial x, or partial w  over a partial y, which measure how w changes if I move in the direction of the x
exists or in the direction of y-axis. So what about moving in other directions? Well, of course, we've seen approximation formulas and so on, but we can still ask, is there a derivative in every direction? And that's basically, yes, that's the direction of the derivative.  in the direction of I hat or j had the vectors that go along the x
of a y-axis. So what if we move in another direction, the same direction of some unit vector, let's call it u,  So if I give you a unit vector, you can ask yourself, if I move in the direction, how
quickly will my function change?  mean is I started some value xy, and there I have my vector u, and I'm going to move in a straight line
in the direction of u, and I have the graph of my function, and I'm asking myself, how quickly does the value change when I move on the graph in that direction?  So let's look at a straight line trajectory. So we have a position vector, that will depend on some
parameter, which I will call S, you'll see why I assume, in such a way that the derivative is, this given unit vector  So why do I use S for my parameter of R of nt? Well, it's a
convention, I'm moving at unit speed along this line. So that means that actually I'm parametriasing things by the distance that I've traveled along this line.  since along the line. So because we are parametriving by distance, we're just using S as a
convent just to distinguish it with this quiff is from other situations. And so now the question will be, what is dwdS?  of change of w when I move like that. Well, of course, we know the answer because that's a special case of a chain rule, so that's how we
will actually compute it. But in terms of what it means, it really means we are asking ourselves, we start at a point and we change the variables in a certain direction, which is not necessarily the x of a y direction,  in that direction, does that make sense as a concept, kind of, I see some faces that are not
completely convinced, so maybe I should show no pictures.  So I just want to give you the actual definition. So first of all, in case you want to what this is all about. So let's say that the components of our unit vector are two numbers a and b, then it means that we'll move along the line  x of S equals some initial value, the point where we're actually looking at
the direction of the derivative plus S times a, let me say plus a plus a plus a times S, and y of S equals y0 plus b times S.  and then we take the derivative. So we have a notation for that, which is going to be dwdS with a subscript in the direction of you to indicate in which direction we're actually going to move, and that's
called that's the direction or direction  in the direction of you.  we've seen things about partial derivatives, and we've seen that the partial derivatives are the slopes of slices of a graph by
a vertical planes that are parallel to the x of a y directions. So if I have a point, at any point, I can slice the graph of my function by two planes, one that's going along the y direction, and then I can look at  Slices of a graph, let me see if I can use that thing. So we can look at the slices of a graph, the other one here, and then we look at the tangent
lines to these slices, and we look at the slope, and that gives us a partial derivative, in case you want, on that side, and want to see also the point  We'll be slicing our graph by a vertical plane, that's not pretty
equal to something more colorful, we'll be slicing things by a plane that is now in the direction of this vector U, and we'll be looking at the slope of the slice of a graph.  on your problem set, in case you're wondering. So now I'm picking a point on the contour plot, and at that point, I slice the graph. So here, I'm starting by slicing in the direction of the x axis. So in fact, what I'm measuring here by the slope of this slice is the partial in the x direction, it's really partial f
partial f, partial x, which is also the direction of the
direction of the
direction of the direction of x of x of x.  And now if I rotate the slice, then I have all of these planes, so you see at the bottom left, I have the direction in which I'm going, does this like rotating line, that tells you in which direction I'm going to be moving, and for each direction I have a plane, and when I slice by that plane, I will get, so I have this direction here going to the southwest, so it gives me a slice of
negative
smallerity of a
sub-space  And the slice has a certain slope, and the slope is going to be the direction of
the derivative in that direction. I think that's as graphic as I can get. Any questions about that?  So let me just write again, just in case you want to, you shouldn't hear me, it's the slope of the slice of a graph by a vertical plane.  that contains, for a given direction, you, or the
spearial to the direction you, so how do we compute it? Well, we can use a chain rule, a chain rule implies that dw, ds is actually the gradient of w, dot product with the velocity vector, d  RDS, but remember, we say that we are going to be moving at unit
speed in the direction of u, so in fact, that's just that's just the value of that product with a unit vector,  product with you. And maybe if you also say in words, this is the
component of the gradient in the direction of a new that makes more sense. So for example, the directional derivative in the direction of i-hat is the component along the x axis,  And as, indeed, the partial derivative in the x direction, things make sense. dd of the value of ds, the
sub-sub-x, which is the value sub x, and the f and find partial, db of the value,  Now, so that's basically what we need to know to compute this guys. So now let's go back to the gradient and see what this tells us about the gradient.  I see you guys are having fun.  S in the direction of u is gradient, w, that's the same as the length of
the gradient, w times the length of u, well, that happens to be 1, because we're taking a unit vector, times the cosine of the angle between the gradient and the given unit vector,  so have this angle, feta. That's another way of saying we're taking a
component of a gradient in the direction of few, but now, what does that tell us? Well, let's try to figure out in which directions, w-thramey would change is the fastest, in which direction it increases the  this is, when is this going to be the largest? If I fixed a point, if I set a point, then the gradient
vector at that point is given to me, but the question is, in which direction does it change the most quickly? Well, what I can change is the direction, and this would be the largest when the cosine is 1.  0, that means, u is actually in the direction of a gradient. So that's a new way to think about the direction of a gradient, the
gradient is the direction in which the function increases, the most quickly at that point.  of the region w is the direction of the first test
increase of the value at a given point. And what is the magnitude of w? Well, it's actually the directional derivative in that direction.  So if I go in that direction, which gives me the fastest
increase, then the corresponding slope will be the length of a gradient. And what's the direction of fastest increase, x going in the opposite direction, if you're going to be  straight down. So the minimum value of dw, ds is achieved when cosine of f of
feta is minus 1, that means feta equals 180 degrees, that means u is in the direction of minus the gradient, it points opposite to the gradient,  And finally, when do we have dw to ds equals 0? So in which direction does the function not change? Why do we have 2n cells to that? 1 is to just use that formula, so that's 1 cosine
feta equals 0, that means feta equals 9 to the f  that means that you is perpendicular to the gradient. The other way to think about it, a direction in which the value
of a value doesn't change, is a direction that's tangent to the level of the surface. If we are not changing, it means we are moving along the level, and that's the same thing, as being tangent to the level.  So let me just show that, on the picture here, so if I actually show you the gradient, you can't really see it here, and you have to
move a bit. So the gradient here is pointing straight up at the point that I've chosen. Now, if I choose a slice that's perpendicular, in a direction that's perpendicular to the gradient, so that's actually tangent to the level curve, then you see that my slide is flat, I don't actually have any slope,  a direction of a derivative in a direction that's perpendicular to the gradient
of a gradient is basically 0. Now, if I rotate, then the slope slowly increases, increases, increases, increases, increases, and it becomes the largest when I'm going in the direction of a gradient. So here, I have actually a pretty big slope. And now, if I keep rotating, then the slope will decrease again, then it becomes 0 when I'm perpendicular, and then it becomes negative, it's the most negative when I'm pointing away from the gradient, and then  So again, when I'm back, the perpendicular number, so for example, if I give you a counterplot, and I ask you to draw the
direction of a gradient vector, well, at this point, for example, you would look at the picture, the gradient vector would be going perpendicular to the level, and it would be going towards higher values of a function.  direction. So that's it for today.