 The following content is provided under a Creative Commons license, your support will help MIT open courseware continue to offer high-quality
educational resources for free to make a donation or to view additional materials from hundreds of MIT courses, visit MIT open courseware at ocw.mit.edu.  you heard a bit about vectors, how many of you actually
know about vectors before that? That's the vast majority, if you're not one of those people, well, hopefully you will learn about vectors right now, I'm sorry that the learning curve will be a bit steeper for the first week, but hopefully you will just find if you have trouble with vectors, do go to your  you know, extra practice if you feel the need to, you'll see it's pretty easy. So just to remind you, a vector is a quantity that has both a direction and a
one of the
one-of-the-stripple of length.  So concretely, the way you draw a vector is by a whole like that. And so it has a length and it's
pointing in some direction. And so now, the way that we compute things with vectors typically is we introduce a coordinate system. So if we're in the plane x, yx is, if we're in space, x, yz, xy, x is, so usually I will try to draw  my xyz x is consistently to look like this, and then I can represent my vector in terms of its
components along the coordinate x's. So that means when I have this arrow, I can ask, how much does it go in the x direction, how much does it go in the y direction, how much does it go in the y direction, how much does it go in the z direction?  to remind us that it's a vector. If it's in a textbook, then sometimes it's in bold because it's easier to type set if you've
tried in your favorite what processor, that's bold, is easy and vectors are not easy. So the vector you can try to decompose in terms of unit vectors directed along the coordinate axis, so the convention is, there's a vector that we call  that points along the x axis and has length 1, there's a vector called j
hat that does the same along the y axis and the k-hat, that does the same along the z axis. And so we can express any vector in terms of its components. So the other notation is a 1, a2, a3 between these square brackets.  maybe if it's the angular brackets. So the length of a vector, we denote by, if you want it's the same notation as the absolute value, so that's going to be a number, as we say now, a scalar quantity.  is sometimes called d of a, and that can be obtained just by scaling the
vector down to unit length, for example, by dividing it by its length.  to be learned. So for example, if I have two points p and Q, then I can throw a vector from p to Q, and that
vector is called vector p Q. So maybe we call it a, but a vector doesn't really have necessarily a starting point, an ending point, so if I decide to start here, and I go by the same distance in the same direction, this is also a vector  So a lot of vectors will throw something at the origin, but we don't have to. So let's just check and see how things went in recitation.  of this vector. I see an answer of foaming. So a lot of you are answering the same thing, maybe I shouldn't spoil it for those who haven't  I see some 6's, I don't know that's a perfectly
good answer to, but hopefully, in a few minutes, it won't be, I don't know anymore.  along the x axis by three units, it goes to the right along the y axis by two units, and then it goes up by
1 unit along the x's. So it's pointing towards here. That's pretty hard to go. So how do we get it length? Well, maybe we can start with something easier, for the length of a vector in the plane,  that a is obtained from a vector b in the plane, let's say b equals 3, I at plus 2 j at, and then we just have to go up by 1
1 unit. So let me try to draw a picture in this vertical plane that contains a and b. If I draw it in the vertical plane, so that's the z-axis, that's not any particular axis,  will go here, and my vector a will go above it, and here that's 1 unit, and here I have a right angle. So I can use the Pythagorean theorem to find that length a squared equals length b squared plus 1. Now, we're reduced to
find the length of b, but the length  inf of b we can again find, using the Pythagorean theorem in the xy
plane, because here we have the right angle, here we have three units, and here we have two units. So if you do the calculations, you will see that, well, inf of b is square root of 3 square root of 3 square plus 2 square, that's 13, so square root of 13.  Length of a is a square root of length b squared plus 1, square if you want, which is going to be square root of
13 plus 1 is square root of 14, hence, and number 2, which almost all of you gave. So if a general formula, if you follow what we did, in general,  if we have a vector with a 1, a1, a2, a3, then the length of a is the square root of a1 squared plus a2 squared plus a3 squared.  or we, indeed, can consider vectors in abstract spaces that have any number of
cordinates, and then you have more components. In this class, we'll mostly see vectors with two or three components only because they're easier to draw, and because a lot of a map that we'll see works exactly the same way, whether you have three variables or a
value of a million variables. If we had a vector with more components, then we would have a lot of trouble pouring it, but we could still define it's length in the same way by summing the squares of the  So I'm sorry to say that here, multivariable, multivariable, it means
mostly to offering, but be assured that it works just the same way if you have 10,000 variables, just calculations are longer.  So how to do with vectors is to add them or to scale them. So if you have two vectors, a and b, then you can form them some a plus b.  and pictures, and fair also computational objects that we can
represent by numbers, so every question about vectors will have two answers, one geometric and one numerical. So let's start with a geometry.  end of a at the head of a. So this is again, vector b. So this actually forms now a
parallelogram, so this side is again, vector a. And now, if we take the diagonal of that parallelogram, this is what we call a plus b. So the idea being that to move along a plus b  b, it's the same as to move first along a and then
and then along b, or along b, then along a, a plus b equals b plus a. Now, if we do it numerically, then all you do is you just add the first component of a with a first component of b, the second with a second, and the third with a third, say that a was a1,  b to a3, b was b1, b2, b3, then you just add this way. So it's pretty straightforward. So for example, I say that my vector of L over R, it's components are free to 1, but I also voted as 3 times I plus 2 times j plus k, what does that mean? So I need to tell you first about
ultiplying by a scalar.  So maybe you should say this is about addition. So multiplication by a scalar, it's very easy. If you have a vector a, then you can form a vector 2a just by making it go twice as far in the same direction, or we can make a
member this clear, or we can even make a minus a and so on.  So now, you see, if I do the calculation, 3 times I plus 2 times j plus k, well, what does it mean? 3 times I is just going to go an on the x
exists, but by distance of 3 instead of 1. And then 2 times j goes two units along the y-axis and k goes up by 1 unit.  end up, indeed, at the end point of a vector a. Any questions at this point? Yes?  Any other questions? Yes? That's correct. If you subtract two vectors that just means you add the opposite of a vector, so if I want it to do a minus b, I would first go along a and then
or minus b, which would take me somewhere over there. So a minus b, if you want, would go from here to here.  So hopefully you've kind of seen that stuff either before in your life, or at least yesterday, so I'm going to use it as an excuse to move
quitely for a while.  these operations will be useful to us when we start trying to do a bit of
geometry. So of course, you've all done some geometry that we're going to see that geometry can be done using vectors, and in many ways, it's the right language for that.  you already know since childhood, but you'll see that the notation somehow helps to make it
maybe more straightforward. So what is dot product? Well, that product is a way of multiplying two vectors to get a number, a scalar. And let me start by giving you a definition in terms of components.  free, a vector b with components b1, b1, b2, b3, we multiply the first
components by the first component, the second by the second, the third by the third, if you have n components you keep going, and you sum all of these together. And important, this is a scalar.  from the definition here, but in the middle of action, when you're going to do complicated
problems, it's sometimes easy to forget. So that's a definition, what is it good for? Why would we ever want to do that? That's kind of a strange operation. So probably to see what it's good for, I should first tell you what it does geometrically.  Well, what you do when you multiply two vectors in this way, I claim the
answer is equal to the length of a times the cosine of the angle between them.  Rb, and I have some angle between them, I multiply the length of a times the
length of b times the cosine of that angle. So that looks like a very artificial operation. Why would we want to do that complicated multiplication?  that is easy. So maybe I should first tell you, how do we get this from that? Because in math, one tries to justify, if I think, to prove theorems. So if you want that's a theorem, that's the first theorem in 1802. So how do we prove that theorem? How do we check that this is, indeed, correct, using this definition?  what does this geometric definition? Well, the first thing it means, before we multiply two vectors, let's
start multiplying a vector with itself, that's probably easier.  what this tells us is we should get the same thing as
multiplying the length of a with itself squared times the cosine of the angle, but now the cosine of an angle of 0, cosine of 0, you all know is 1, so that's going to be length a squared.  at a1 squared plus a2 squared plus a2 squared plus a3 squared, that is, indeed,
the square over length. So check, that works. Now, what about two different vectors? Can we understand what this says and how it relates to that?  a, and b, and I want to try to understand what's going on. So my claim is that we are going to be able to understand the relation between this and that in terms of the
the law of Cauchyne's. So the law of Cauchyne's is something that tells you about the length of a third side in a triangle, like this, in terms of these two sides,  and the angle here. So the low of cosine, which hopefully you have
c in before, says that, so let me give a name to this side. Let's call this side c, and as a vector, c is a minus b, it's minus b plus a.  So the lower of cosine's says that the length of a third side in this triangle is equal to length a squared plus length b squared, well, if I stop here, that would be
partagoras, but I don't have a right angle, so I have a third term which is  this length, a length be cosine theta. As if I want to
see in this formula, I hear some notes, well, it's a fact about, I mean, you probably haven't seen it with vectors, but it's a fact about the side lengths in a triangle, and I'm not sure that if you haven't seen it before,  a proof of a law of cosine's if you believe this,
overwise, it's the upper way around. So let's try to see how this relates to what I'm saying about the dot product.  c that c, well c is a minus b, so it's a minus b, that product, a minus b. What do we want to do in a situation like that? Well, we want to expand this into a sum of four terms, how we allow to do that? Well, we have this dot product, it's a mysterious new operation, we don't really know.  expanding, factoring, and so on. So I can write that as a dot a minus a dot b minus b, b dot a, plus b dot b. So a dot a is length a squared, let me jump ahead to the last term, b dot b is length b squared,  And then these two terms, well, they're the same. You can check from the definition that a dot b or b dot a are the same thing. So there's no hidden trick here, this is really minus 2a dot b. So now let's compare these two formulas.  So if you believe in the value of cosine, then it tells you that, yes, this is a proof that a dot b equals
equals, a, a, a, and b cosine theta. Or this, if you've never seen the value of cosine, but you're willing to believe this, then this is the proof of the value of cosine.  questions. So in the second one, there isn't a cosine
feta because I'm just expanding a dot product. So I'm just, you know, writing c equals a minus b, and then I'm expanding this algebraically, and then I get to an n so it has an a dot b. So then if I wanted to express that without a dot product, then I would have to introduce a cosine
or
coseign, and I would get the same as that.  So, if you want the next step to recover a little of cosine, it would be to plug in this
fimula for a, dot b, and then you would have a cosine.  what is this good for? Now that we have a definition, we should figure out what we can do with it. So what are the applications of that product? Well, we'll discover new
applications of that product throughout the entire semester, but let me tell you, at least about those that are readily visible.  So let's do an example. Let's say that, for example, I have, in space, I have a point p, which is at 1, 0, 0, 0, I have a point Q, which is at 0, 1, 0, so it's at distance 1 here, 1 here, and I have a third point  at 0, 0, 0, 2, so it's at height 2. And let's say that I'm curious and I'm wondering what is the angle, so if I have a triangle in space,
connecting p, Q and R, and I'm wondering what is this angle here? So of course, one solution is to build a model and then go and measure the angle, but we can do better than that, we can just find the
angle using that product.  how would we do that? So if we look at this formula, we say that we want to find the
angle here, well, let's look at the formula for pq dot pR, where we said it should be length pq times length pR times the cosine of the angle.  And what do we not know? Well, certainly at this point, we don't know the cosine of the
angle, that's what we would like to find. But the lengths, certainly we can compute, we know how to find these lengths. And this dot product, we know how to compute because we have an easy formula here. So we can compute everything else and then find theta. So actually, what we will do is we will find theta in this way.  we'll take the dot product of a product of
picture with PR, and then we'll divide by the lengths.  So let's see. So we say cosine theta is p, k, that p r of L,
of L, like p,  and x p are, so let's try to figure out what is vector p
cute. Well, to go from p to Q, I should go minus 1 unit along the x direction plus 1 unit along the y direction, and I'm not moving in the z direction. So to go from p to Q, I have to move by minus 1, 1, 1, 0.  So, pR, I claim is this, then the length of these vectors, well, we take minus 1 squared plus 1 squared plus 0 squared, square root, and then same thing with the other one.  what about the numerator? Well, so remember to do the dot product, we multiply this by this, and that by that, that by that, and we add, minus 1 times minus 1 makes 1 plus 1 times 0, that's 0, 0 times 2 is 0 again. So we will get 1 of L squared of 10, that's the cosine of the angle.  actual angle, where we have to take a calculator, find the inverse cosine, and you'll find that it's about 71.5 degrees. Actually, we'll be using
mostly a few things, but for today, that's certainly a more speaking and so on.  that's really neat about the answer. We don't really know what it means exactly because it makes it together over the
lamps and the angle, but one thing's interesting here, it's the sign of the answer, the fact that we got a positive number. So if you think about it, the lengths are always positive. So the sign of a product product is the same as the sine of cosine theta.  the sine of a, that b is going to be positive if the angle is less than 90 degrees. So that means, geometrically, my two vectors are going more or less in the same direction.  because that's when the cosine will be 0, and it will be negative, if the triangle is more than 90 degrees, so that means that
goes in opposite directions. So that's basically one way to think about what dot product measures, it measures how much the two vectors are going along each other.  So let's see, did I have a number 1 there? Yes, so if I had a number, when I
must have a number 2, the second application is to detect orthogonality, it's to figure out when two things are perpendicular. So orthogonality is just a complicated word from Greek to say things are perpendicular.  let's say I give you the equation x plus 2y plus 3z equals 0. So that
define a certain number, a certain set of points in space, and what do you think the set of solutions looks like if I give you this equation?  So I see various competing answers, but I see a lot of people voting for n number 4, I see also some, I don't know, and some other things, but the majority vote
seems to be a claim, and indeed, that's the correct answer. So how do we see that it's a claim?  So I should say this is the equation of a plane. So there's many ways to see that. And I'm not going to give you all of them, but here's one way to think about it.  let's think, geometrically, about how to express this
condition in terms of vectors. So let's say, let's take the origin, p, by convention, is the point 0, 0, 0, 0, and let's take a point p that will satisfy this equation or not, so it coordinates x, y, z. So what does this condition here mean?  So, vector op, of course, has components x, yz. Now, we can think of this as a product product between
Op and a mysterious vector, that may be a mysterious for very long, namely the vector 1, 2, 3.  If I take the dot product, op dot a, I get x times 1 plus y times 2 plus z times 3. But now, what does it mean that the dot product between op and a is 0? What it means that op and a are perpendicular? So I have this vector a, I'm not going to go over to draw it really strictly, let's say it goes, for example,  then a point p of this equation, exactly when the vector from 0 to p is perpendicular to a, and they claim that
define a plane. For example, if it helps you to see it take a vertical vector, what does it mean to be perpendicular to the vertical vector? It means your horizontal, it's the horizontal plane. Here, it's a plane that passes through the origin and is perpendicular to this vector a.  So what we get is plain for the origin perpendicular to this guy, and in general, what you should remember,  is that two vectors have a dot product equal to 0 if and only if that's equivalent to cosine of the
angle between them is 0, that means the angle is 90 degrees, that means a and b are perpendicular. So we have a very fast way of checking whether two vectors are perpendicular.  One additional application I think we'll see that, actually, tomorrow, is to find the
components of a vector along a certain direction. So I claim we can use this intuition I gave about that product, telling us how much two vectors go in the same direction to actually give a precise meaning to the notion of a component for vector, not just along the x, y, or the x is, but along any direction in space.  I should probably stop here, but I will see you tomorrow at 2 here, and we'll learn more about that, and about
close product.