 The following content is provided under a Creative Commons Commons Commons license, your support will help MIT open courseware continue to offer high-quality educational resources for free to make a donation or to view
additional materials from hundreds of MIT courses, visit MIT open courseware at ocw.mit.edu.  So last time we saw that if a vector field happens to be a gradient field,  So it can be computed, actually, by taking the change in
value of a potential between the endpoint and the starting point of a curve. So if we have a curve c from a point p0 to a point p1, then the line integral for work depends only on the endpoints,  natural path we choose. So we say that the 90-th interval is
path independent. And we also say that the vector field is conservative because of conservation of energy, which tells you if you start at a point and you come back to the same point, then you haven't  So if we have a closed curve, then the line integral for work is just 0. And basically, we say that these properties are equivalent, being a gradient field, or being
bath independent, or being conservative, and what I promised to you is that today we would  see a criterion to decide whether a vector field is a
great and field or not, and how to find a potential function if it is a gradient field. So let's put a topic for today. So question is, test thing, whether a given vector field, let's say M and n,  So for that, well, let's stop with an observation. So say that it is a gradient field. So that means that the first
component of a field is just  the partial of f we respect to the value of x, and the second
component is the partial of f with respect to y. And now we have seen an interesting property of the second partial derivatives of a function, which is if you take the partial derivative first with respect to x, then with respect to y, or first with respect to y, then with respect to x, you get the same thing.  y equals f sub y x, and that means M sub y equals n sub x. So if you have a gradient field, then it should have this property.  is important to know, so I'm going to put that in a box, it's a box in box, and so the claim that I want to make is that there's a converse of sorts, this is
actually basically all we need to check.  OK, so conversely, if, so I'm going to put here a condition, and My equals nx, then f is a gradient field.  What's the condition that I need to put here? Well, we'll see a more precise version of that next week. But for now, let's just say if our vector field is defined and
defrandsable everywhere in the plane.  So we need actually a vector field that's well-defined, that's well-defined everywhere, you're not allowed to have somehow places where it's not well-defined. Otherwise, you have a counter-example on your
problem set this week. If you look at the last problem on the problem set this week, it gives you a vector field that satisfies this condition everywhere where it's defined, but there's a point where it's not defined, and that goes to somehow, I mean, everything that I'm going to say today,  makes down for that example, because of that. So I mean, we'll shed more light on this a bit later with a notion of simply
connected regions and so on, but for now, let's just say if it's defined everywhere, and satisfies this criterion, then it's a gradient field.  So that's what we need to check. So let's look at an example. Well, one vector field that we've been looking at a lot was minus yI plus x j. Remember, that was the vector field that looked like  at unit speed. So I think last time we already decided that this guy should not be allowed to be a
agridient field and should not be conservative because if we integrate on the unit circle, then we'll get a positive answer.  partial m, partial y, well, that's going to be a negative 1, if you take
partial n, partial x, that's going to be 1, and these are not the same.  OK, any questions about that?  remain in certain part of a plane, for some values of x and y, can I conclude these things, and it's a great infield in that
part of a plane, and conservative, and so on. So the answer for now is in general no, and when we spend a bit more time on it, actually, maybe I should move that maybe we'll talk about it later this week instead of when I planned.  And basically, if you have that kind of property in a region that doesn't have any holds inside it, then things will work. The problem comes from your vector field satisfying this criterion in a
region that has a hold in it, because then what you don't know is whether your potential is actually well-defined and takes the same value when you move all around the whole, it might come back to take a different value. If you look carefully and think hard about the example of the problem set, that's exactly what happens  Anyway, again, I will say more about that later. So for now, we basically need our function to be, I mean, so I should still say, if you have this property for a vector field that's not quite defined everywhere, your
move and welcome, you should probably still try to look for potential using the methods that we'll see, but something might go wrong later.  OK, let's do another example. So let's say that I give you is vector fields.  So this a here is a number, question is for which value of a is this
going to be possibly a gradient? So if you have your flashcards, then that's a good time to use them to vote, assuming that a number is small enough to be made with.  test, M sub y, and S sub x. I don't see anyone, I see people doing it with their hands, and that works very well.  So I see there is people with a quite an answer, and yes, that's a strange answer, but I see, OK, that's a good answer.  number y, that is going to be just a, x and sub x, that is a, x, so I would like, equals 8. By the way, so when you set these two equal to each other, there really have to be equal
everywhere, so you don't want to somehow solve for x or anything like that, just want these expressions in terms of x and y  I mean, you can't say, well, if x equals 0, that always equal, you have that's true, but that's not what we're asking. OK, so now we come to the next stage of the next logical question, let's say that we've passed the test, so we've put a equals a in here, so now it should be a gradient field.  so that it becomes 8 from now on. The question is, how do we find the function, which has this as gradient? So one option is to try to guess. And actually, quite often, you will succeed that way, but that's not a valid method on next week's test. So we're going to see two different
systematic methods, and you should be using one of these because, well, guessing doesn't always work,  And actually, I can come up with examples where if you try to guess you will surely fail, I can come up with trick 1's, but I don't want to put
out on the test, but still. So the next stage is finding the potential. And let me just emphasize, we can only do that  if step 1 was successful, if we have a vector field that cannot possibly be a gradient, then we shouldn't try to look for a
potential, it's obvious, but it's probably worth pointing out. So there's two methods, and the first method that we'll see is by computing line integrals,  So let's see how that works. So let's say, let's say, I take some path, that starts at the origin, or actually,
anywhere you want, but let's take the origin, that's my favorite point.  So let's go to a point, we've coordinate x1 and y1. And let's take my favorite curve, and let's compute the line integral of that field along the work done along the curve. Well, by the fundamental theorem, that should be equal to the value of the
potential at the end point minus the value of the  Well, so that means I can actually write f of x1, y1 equals, bless you.  So, say that you have some potential function, and let's say that you add 1 to it, it's a
telly potential function, adding 1 doesn't change your gradient, you can even add 18 or a number of it you want. So this is just going to be an integration constant, it's the same thing as in one variable calculus, when you take the anti-derivative of a function, it's only defined up to adding a constant.  And this we can compute using the definition of a line in theorem, because we know what we don't know what little f is, but we know what the vector field is, so we can compute that.  of it paths to have, for example, you can go on a straight line from the
orgin to that point that would be slightly easier, but in fact, first even easier, the easiest of all, probably, is to just go first along the x axis to x10, and then go up parallel to the y axis.  away because x or y is constant. So let's try to use that method on our example.  So let's say that I'm going to integrate, sorry, how about that in the proof 2?  f from the origin first along the x-axis to x1, 0, then vertically
to x1, y1, and so I want to compute the line and tail hole along that curve. So let's say I want to do it for this vector field, I want to find the potential for this vector field.  here, let me copy it, because I'll have to, you know, at some point, for x squared plus
8, xy and 3y squared plus 4x squared, so that will become the integral of 4x squared plus 8xy dx plus 3y  squared plus 4x squared dy. Now, to evaluate on this broken line, I will, of course, evaluate
separately on each of the two segments. So I'll start with this segment that I will call c1, and then I will do this one that equals c2.  well, if I'm on c1, then x varies from 0 to x1. Well, actually, I don't know if x1 is positive or not, so if you
can write this, I really should say just x goes from 0 to x1. And what about y? y is just 0, so I will set y equal 0 and also dy equal 0.  get that the line integral on c1, well, a lot of stuff goes away. So the entire second term with dy goes away because dy is 0, and in the first term, a to xy goes away because y is 0 as well. So I just have an integral of f of x squared, dx from 0 to x1.  1 and a y1 for my point, and not just x and y, it's to avoid confusion. I'm using x and y as my integration
value of variables, and x1 and y1 as constants, but now representing the endpoint of my pf. And so if I integrate this, I should get 4, 3, x1 cubed.  So if I'm on c2, so y goes from 0 to y1, and what about x? x is constant equal to x1, so dx becomes just 0, it's a constant.  get the integral from 0 to y1, so the entire first
time with dx goes away, and then I have 3y squared plus x is x1, x1 squared, dy. So that integrates to y cubed plus 4x1 squared y from 0 to y1, if you prefer,  plus for x1 squared y1. Now that we have done both of them, we can just add them together, and that will give us the
formula for the potential.  OK, so f of x1 and y1 is 4, 3rd, x1 cubed plus y1 cubed plus 4x1 squared y1 plus a constant. If at constant, is just the integration constant that we had from the beginning.  Now, now you can drop the subscribes if you prefer, you can just say f is 4, 3, x cubed plus y cubed plus 4, x squared y plus constant. And you can check if you take the gradient of this, then you could get again, this vector field of over there.  no, well, it depends whether you're just trying to find one
potential or if you're trying to find all the possible potentials. If a problem just says find a potential, then you don't have to include the constant. This guy, we thought the constant, is a valid potential, just you have others. So if your neighbor comes to you and says, oh, your answer must be wrong, I got this plus 18, both and so are collect.  OK, by the way, so instead of going first and on the x
x's then, vertically, you could do it the other way around, of course, start and on the y-axis, then horizontally, and that's the same level of difficulty, you just exchange the role of x and y, in some cases, it's actually even making more sense, maybe to go, to go,  But usually, this setting is easier just because each of these two guys was actually
very easy to compute. But maybe if you suspect that polar coordinates will be involved somehow in the answer, then maybe it makes sense to choose different paths, maybe a straight line is better.  So now we have an other number of
an effort to look at, which is using anti-derivatives. So the goal is the same, still to find the potential function, and you see that finding the potential is really the multivariable analog of finding the
anti-derivative in one variable  So here, we did it, basically, by hand by computing the integral. If you have a thing you could try to say is, wait, I already know how to take
antiderivatives, let's use that instead of computing integers. And it works, but you have to be careful about how you do it. So let's see how that works. So let's still do it with a same example.  is 4x squared plus 8xy, and f sub y is 3y squared plus 4x squared. So let's just look at one of these at a time. If we look at this one, we know how to solve this, because it's just telling us we have to integrate this with respect to x.  OK, well, let's call them 1 and 2, because I will have to refer to them again. So let's start with equation 1, and let's integrate with respect to x.  when I integrate 8, xy, y is just a constant, so I will get
for x squared y, and that's not quite the n to it, because there's an integration constant. And here, when I say, as an integration constant, it just means the x-thrattorne does not depend on x, that's what it means to be a constant in this set, but maybe my constant still depends on y, so it's not actually a true constant.  a constant, it's actually a function of y. So the good news that we have is that this function
non-negative function on x, so it should be, we've made some progress, we've got part of the answer, and we've simplified the problem. So if we have anything that looks like this, it will satisfy the first condition, so now we need to look at the second condition,  f sub y to be that. And, well, so we know what f is, so let's compute f sub y from this. So from this, I get f sub y, so what do I get if I differentiate this with respect to y?  of g. So I would like to match this with what I had. So if I match this with equation 2, then that will tell me what the
derivative of g should be.  So if we compare the two things there, we get 4x squared plus g prime of y should be equal to 3y squared plus 4x squared, and of course, the 4x squared goes away.  that tell us you g prime is free y squared, and that integrates to y cubed plus constant. Now, this time, the constant is a true constant, because g did not depend on anything over and y, and the constant does not
do not depend on y, so it's really a real constant.  Now, if we plug this into star, we get f equals 4, 3rds x cubed plus 4x squared y plus y cubed plus constant. And I mean, of course, again, now, with this constant is  see, the advantage of this method is you don't have to write any
intervales, the small drawback is you have to follow this procedure carefully.  match them. Well, the difficulty is matching is actually quite tricky because you don't know in that way, whether or whether you have a
same expression, it could be that you could say, let's just take the terms that are here and missing there and combine the terms that take all the terms that appear in either one, that's actually not a good way to do it, because if I put sufficiently
complicate it, if you could, if I put sufficiently complicated
trick functions in there, then you might not be able to see that two terms are the same.  take an easy one, let's say that here I have 1 plus 10 squared, and here I have a
certain squared, then you might not actually notice that there's a difference, but there's no difference, so anyway, so I'm saying do it this way, don't do it any other way, because there's a risk of making a mistake of a way.  to y, and then differentiate and match with the value of a
spec to x. So what I'm saying is just take one of them integrate, get an answer that involves a function of the other variable, then differentiate that answer and compare and see what you get.  at x and x here in this expression, that would have told you that something is going wrong, g is a
function of y and L. So if you get an x here, maybe you want to go back and check where it is really a gradient field.  And basically, starting at the end of next week, we're going to do triple
interval in-tagol, line-integolts in space, and so on. So the format is first, we do everything in two variables, so then we'll do it in free variables, and what happens with more than free will be left to your imagination.  but who prefers the second
measure, which prefers the second method, well, anyway, you get to use whichever one you want, and I would agree with you, that the second method is slightly more effective in that you're writing less than  OK, so let's move on a bit. Well, let me stop by actually doing a small pickup.  we have various notions. One is to say that a vector field is a gradient in a certain
or region of a plane, and we have an notion in which is being conservative, which says that the integral, the 9-interval  along any closed curve. So actually, let me introduce a new piece of notation. So to just to remind ourselves that we're doing it
along a closed curve, very often, we put just a circle through the integral to tell us, well, this is a curve that closes on itself, it ends where it started.  that you're doing it on a closed curve. It's actually useful for a few
value of physical applications, and also when you state theorems in that way, it reminds you, oh, I need to be on a closed curve to do it. And so we've said these two things are equivalent. And now we have a third thing, which is n sub x equals m sub y at every point.  So just to summarize the discussion, we've said if we have a gradient
field, then we have this, and the converse is true in suitable regions.  R, as we'll see, soon, in a simply-connected region. I guess some of you can't see what I'm writing here, but it doesn't matter because you're not
officeually supposed to know it yet, that will be next week.  so there's only if a vector field is defined in the entire plane or in a
region that's called simply connected, and more about that later. So now let me just introduce a quantity that probably a lot of you have heard about in physics, that measures precisely failure to be conservative, so that's called the curl of a vector field.  So, so, so, so, so,  So the definition, we say that the curl of f is the quantity n sub x minus m sub y.  in a way that's a single quantity. So in this new language, the condition that we have, the condition that we had over L, this
condition says k Lf equals 0, that's the new version of n x equals My. So it measures failure of a vector field to be conservative.  I should probably, so the test for conservativeness is that the curl of f should be 0. So I should probably tell you a little bit about what the curl is, what it
measures, what it does, because that's  something that is probably useful, it's a very strange quantity, if you put it in that form.  Yes? Yes, what you can also use it, so if you fail this test, when you know for sure that you're not a gradient
field, so you might as well do that. If you satisfy the test, but you're not defined everywhere, then there's still a bit of ambiguity, and you don't know for sure.  So let's try to see a little bit what the curl measures. So I want to claim that just to give you some intuition, let's first think about the
velocity field.  of a motion. So if you want a fancy word, that's measure of the
verticity of a motion, it tells you how much twisting is taking place at a given point. So for example, if I take a constant vector field, where my fluid is just all moving in the same place,  So in the same direction, where this is just constant, then of course, the curl is 0 because if you take the
partial, you get 0, and indeed, that's not what you would call swelling.  let's say that I take the radial vector field, where everything just
flows away from the origin, so that f equals x, y, well, if I take the curl, so I have to take partial, partial x of a second component, which is y, minus partial, partial y of first component, which is x, I will get 0, and indeed, if you think about what's going on here, there's no rotation involved.  On the other hand, if you consider our favorite rotation
vector field, negative y and x, then it's curl is going to be, well, n sub x minus  M sub y will be 1 plus 1 equals 2, and that corresponds to the fact that we're rotating. Actually, we're rotating at unit angular speed, so the curl actually measures twice the angular speed of the rotation part of a
motion at any given point. So now, if you have an actual motion, a more complicated field than these, then  there you are, you can think of a motion as a combination of
translation effect, maybe dilation effect, maybe rotation effect, possibly over things like that. And what the curl will measure is how intense the rotation effect is at that particular point. So I'm not going to try to make a much more precise statement, what I mean, the precise statement is what curl measures is really this quantity of  to measure how much rotation is taking place at any given point. And of course, in a complicated
motion, you might have more rotation at some point, and at some others, which is why the curve will depend on x and y.  if high curl tend to be hurricane or tornadoes or things like that, they're not very pleasant things. And the sign of a curl, that is whether you're going clockwise or counterclockwise.  So, care measures, well, twice the angular velocity of the rotation
components of a velocity  field. Now, what about the first field? Because after all, where we got to this was coming from and trying to understand forces and the work we do, so I should tell you what it means for a first,  Measure the torque, the torque, exerted on a test object that you put at any point.  So, the torque is the rotational analogous of the force, we had this analogy about
value, velocity versus angular velocity, and mass versus moment of inertia, and then in that analogy, a force divided by the mass is what will cause acceleration, which is a derivative of velocity.  a table of angular velocity, maybe actually I should
have I furthered them, so I should divide it by the moment of inertia, is going to be ddT  of angular velocity. I'll leave it up to your physics teachers to decide what
let us to use for all these things. That's the analog of force divided by mass equals acceleration, which is ddT of velocity.  of a velocity field, measures the angular velocity of its rotation, then by this analogy, the curl of a first
field should measure the torque it exerts on a mass per unit moment of inertia.  when a velocity field, the curl will tell you how fast your guy is spinning at a given time. If you put something that floats, for example, on your fluid, something very light, then it's going to start spinning. And the curl of a velocity field tells you how fast it is spinning at a given time, up to a
effector of 2, and the curl of a first field tells you how quickly the angular velocity is going to increase or  Well, next time, we are going to see green sphere, which is actually going to tell us a lot more about
cure and failure of conservativeness.