 The following content is provided under a Creative Commons Commons Commons license, your support will help MIT open courseware continue to offer high-quality educational resources for free to make a donation or to view
additional materials from hundreds of MIT courses, visit MIT open courseware at ocw.mit.edu.  line integrals for work of a vector field along a curve. So we have a curve in the plane c, we have a vector field f that gives us a vector at every point. And we want to find a work done along the curve  So that's the line integral along c of f dot dR, or, marginically, line
interval along c of f dot t dS, where t is the unit tangent vector, and dS is the arc length element, or in coordinates, that's the integral of m dx plus n  y, where M and R have a
components of a vector field. So let's do an example that we'll just summarize what we did yesterday, and then we'll move on to interesting observation about this.  look at now, let's say I give you the vector field y i plus x j, so it's not
not completely obvious what it looks like, but here's a compute or plot of that vector field so that tells you a bit what it does, points in all sorts of directions.  by this vector field, if I move along this closed curve, I started the origin, when I moved along the x
x to 1, then I move along the unit circle to the diagonal, and then I move back to the origin in a straight line.  a sector of a unit disk corresponding to angles between 0 and 45 degrees. So to compute this line and thing all, what we have to do is we have to set up three
different integrals and add them together.  So we need to set up the integral of y dx plus x dy for each of these pieces, each of these pieces.  x variable and say that because we're on the, so we're going from the origin to 1, 0, we know we're on the x axis, so
that y there is, in fact, just 0, and the variable will be x from 0 to 1. If you prefer, you can parameterize things, say x equals  c, for t from 0 to 1, and y equals 0. What doesn't change is y is 0, and therefore, dy is also 0. So in fact, we're integrating y dx plus x dy, but that becomes, well, 0 dx plus 0, and that's just going to
goes to give you 0.  the line integral here is very easy to compute. Of course, you can also do it geometrically, because, geometrically, you can see in the
picture, along the x-axis, the vector field is pointing vertically, if I'm on the x-axis, my vector field is actually in the y direction, so it's perpendicular to my curve, so the work done is going to be 0, f dot t will be 0.  So f of the t is 0, so the n-th equals 0. Any questions about this first part of a calculation?  OK, let's move on to a more interesting
part of it. Let's do a second part, which is the function of a unit circle.  of a curve, let's c2, and of course, we have to choose how to express x and y in terms of a
single variable. Well, most likely when you're moving on a circle, you're going to use the angle along the circle to tell you where you are. So we're going to use the angle theta as parameter, and we'll say, well, we're on the unit circle, so x is cosine theta,  and y is sine theta. What's the range of theta? theta goes from 0 to pi over 4. So whenever I see dx, I will replace it by, well, the derivative of cosine is
negative sine, so minus sine theta, d theta, and dy, the derivative of sine is cosine, so it will become cosine theta, d theta.  So I'm computing the integral of y dx plus x dy, that means I'll be actually computing the
integral of y is sine theta, dx that's negative sine theta, d theta, plus x cosine,  dy is cosine theta, d theta, from 0 to pi over 4. So that's integral from 0 to pi over 4 of cosine square minus sine square, and if you know your trig, then you should recognize this as cosine of 2 theta.  of sine 2 theta from 0 to pi over 2, pi over 4, sorry, and sine pi over 2 is 1, so you will get 1 1 1 1 1 1.  1. So the third guy is when we come back to the origin along the diagonal. So we go in a straight line from this point, where's this point?  So we need to figure out a way to express x and y in terms of a same parameter. So one way, which is very natural, would be to just say, well, let's say we move from here to here over time, and at times 0, we're here, at time 1, we're here, we know how to parameterize this line.  this 9, so we start at 1 over 2, and we go down by 1 over 2 in
time 1 and same with y. That's actually perfectly fine, but that's unnecessarily complicated. Why is it complicated?  would be easier to actually just look at a function in this
direction and then say, well, if we have a certain work, if we move from here to here, then the work done moving from here to here is just going to be the opposite.  from 0 to 1 of l, 1 of l, 2, and take, well, sorry, that gives us what I will call minus c3, which means c3 backwards. And then we can say the integral for work
or on minus c3 is the opposite of a  along c free. Or if you're comfortable with
integration where variables go down, then you could also say that t just goes from 1 over square root of 2 down to 0. And when you set up your integral, it will go from 1 over root 2 to 0. And of course, it will be the negative of 1 from 0 to 1 over 1 over root 2.  we'll get that, well, of course, dx is dT, dy is dT, so the integral along minus c free of ydx plus x dy is just the integral from 0 to 1 over 2 of t dT plus dT, so I'm messing up my
black board,  which is going to be, well, the integral of 2t dt, which is d squared
between these bounds, which is 1 1 1 1 1. That's the integral along minus c free, along the reverse path, and if I want to do it along c free instead.  then I just take the negative. Or if you prefer, you could have done it directly with
integol from 1 over root 2 to 0, which gives you immediately a negative 1 1 1.  I'm not writing f that dR just to save space, that's 0 plus 1 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, and that
comes out to 0, so a lot of calculations for nothing. So that should give you a good overview of various ways to compute 9 integrals, any questions about all that?  So next, let me tell you about how to avoid computing line intervals.  a gradient vector, well, if the time it was just a vector, but that vector
depended on x and y, so in fact, it's a vector field. So here's an interesting special case.  f is a function of two variables x and y, and that's
called the potential for the vector field, the reason is, of course, from physics.  by the first field, and its gradient gives you a false. Actually, not quite, if you're a physicist, then the first will be negative gradient, so that means that
fisitists potentials are the opposite of a mathematician's potential. So it's just here to confuse you. It doesn't really matter, but to make things simpler, we are using this convention, and you just put a minus sign if you're doing physics.  then I claim we can simplify the evaluation of the line integral for work. So perhaps you've seen in physics, the work done by, say, the electrical force is actually given by the change in value of a
potential from the starting point to the ending point  are same for gravitational force. So these are special cases of what's called the fundamental theorem of
calculus for line integrals. So the fundamental theorem of calculus, not for line integrals, tells you if you integrate or derivative, then you get back the function. And here, it's the same thing in multivariable calculus, it tells you if you take the line integral of a gradient of a function, what you get back is the function.  OK, so  A fundamental theorem of calculus for 9 integrals, says, following thing it says, if you integrate a vector field that's the gradient of a function, along a
curve,  of, let's say that you have a care of that goes from some starting point p0 to some
ending point p1, then all you will get is the value of f at p1 minus the value of f at p0. So that's a pretty nifty formula, but it only works if the field that you're integrating is a gradient, you know it's a gradient,  of a function little f. I mean, we can't put just any vector field in here, we have to put the
credient of f. So actually on Tuesday, we'll see how to decide whether a vector field is a gradient or not, and if it is a gradient, how to find the potential function. So we'll cover that. But for now, we're going to try to figure out a little bit more about this,  what it says, what it means physically, how to think about it
geometrically, and so on. So maybe I should say, if you try to write this in coordinates, because that's also useful way to think about it, if I give you a line integral along c, the gradient field, the components  to the integrating f sub x dx plus f sub y dy. Or if you prefer, that's the same thing as
actually integrating df, so I'm integrating the differential of a function f. Well, then that's the change in f. And of course, if you write it in this form, then  obvious to you that this should be true. I mean, in this form, actually, it's the same statement as in
single variable calculus, and actually, that's how we prove a theorem. So let's prove this theorem.  to compute through compute this integral. How will you do that? Well, the way you compute the integral, actually, is by choosing a
parameter and expressing everything in terms of that parameter. So we'll set, well, so we know it's f sub x dx plus f sub y dy, and we'll want to  in the form x equals x of t, y equals y of t. So if we do that, then dx becomes x
prime of t dt, dy becomes y prime of t dt. So we know x is x of t that tells us dx is x prime of t dt.  y is y of t, gives us d y is y prime of g dt. So now what we are
integrating, actually, is it becomes the integral of f sub x times gx dt plus f sub y times dy dt  dt. But now, here, I recognize a familiar guy, I've seen this one before, in the chain rule. This guy by the chain rule is the rate of change of f if I take x and y to be functions of t, and I plug
plug goes into f. So in fact, what I'm integrating is df dt,  when I think of f as a function of f as a function of t by just plug in x and y as
function of t, a t, and so maybe actually, if you now say I have sometimes, t goes from some initial time, let's say, t0 to t1,  If the usual fundamental theorem of calculus, I know that this will be just a change in the
value of f between T0 and T1.  So in take hold from t0 to t1 of df dt, dt, well, that becomes f between t0 and t1, f of what? We just have to be a little bit careful here.  a function of t by putting x of t and y of t into it. So let me write that down carefully. What I'm integrating to is f of x of
t and y of t. Does that sound fair? And so when I plug in t1, I get the point where I am at time t1, that's the end point of my curve, when I plug t0, I will get the starting point  of my curve, p0, and that's the end of a proof.  We had this vector field, could it be that by x at x at an, that vector field was a gradient
field, so remember our vector field was y, x, can we think of a function with a derivative respect to x is y, and derivative with respect to y is x? Yeah, x times y sounds like a good candidate, well, f of xy is xy.  So that means that the line-in-take-rolls that we computed along these things can be just evaluated from just finding out the
value of f at the endpoint, so here's version 2 of my plot, where I've added the control plot of a function xy on top of the vector field.  And so now, when we move, well, the origin is an unverifiable
cure of f equals 0, and when we start going along c1, we stay on f equals 0. So there's no work, the potential doesn't change.  say, but it was much easier than computing. So for example, the integral along c2 is actually just, so c2 goes from 1, 0 to 1 of L  2, 1 over root 2, so that's 1 1 1 1, 1 1 1, 1 1 1, because c2 was going here, and at this point, f is 0, at that point, f is 1 1 1, and similarly for the over's. And of course, when you get 0,  because the total change in f, when you go from here to here to here to here to here, eventually
you're back at the same place, so f hasn't changed. So that's a neat trick, and it's important conceptually because a lot of forces are gradients of potentials, namely the gravitational force, electric force.  for example, magnetic fields, certainly unaddeded.  if f is a gradient field, it's not true of n y's.  OK, let's see what are the consequences of a
finemental theorem?  the radiant field, then what do we have? Well, there's various nice features of work done by gradient fields that are not
true for over vector fields. So one of them is this property of path independence.  So the claim is, if I have a line integral to compute, then it doesn't matter which
path I take, as long as it goes from point a to point b, it just depends on the point where I start, the point where I end. And that's certainly false in general, but for a gradient field, it works.  and c2, so they go from the same point to the same point, but in different
ways, then in this situation, the line integral along c1 is equal to the line integral along c2. Well, actually, let me, let me insist that this is only for gradient  by putting gradient f in here, just so you don't get tempted to use this for a
field that's not a gradient field. If c1 and c2 have the same start and end points, how do we prove that?  very easy, we just use the fundamental theorem, it tells us if you compute the
line and take a role along c1, it's just f at this point minus f at this point, if you do it for c2, well, same, so they're the same. And for that, you don't actually even need to know what little f is, you know in advance that it's going to be the same.  use path independence, but only if you know it's a gradient.  OK, I guess this one is bad, so we'll stay here for a while, because nobody's still enough to erase it. Now, when you come back next
here and you still see that formula, you'll see, OK, yes, but there's no useful information here.  So what's another consequence? So if you have a gradient field, it's what's called conservative. So what's a conservative field? Well, the word conservative comes from the idea in physics is an open of an
offent of conservation of energy. It tells you that you cannot get energy for free  out of your first field. So what it means is in particular, if you take a closed trajectory, so a trajectory that goes from
some point back to the same point, so if c is a closed curve, then the work done along c  is 0. OK, that's the definition of what it means to be conservative. If I take any closed curve, the work will always be 0. Contrary, not conservative means, somewhere there is a curve, along which the work is not 0. If you find a curve where the work is 0, that's not enough to say it's conservative. You have to show that no matter what
what curve I give you, if it's closed
cure, it will always be 0.  So what that means concretely is, if you have a first field that's conservative, then you cannot build somehow some perpetual motion out of it, you can't build something that will just keep going just power by that first, because that first is actually not
providing any energy after you've gone one loop around, nothing's happened from the point of view of the energy provided by that first.  then you can try to actually maybe find a loop where the work will be positive, and then that thing will just keep running. So actually, if you look at magnetic fields and
transformers or no power adapters and things like that, you precisely extract energy from a magnetic field. Of course, I mean, you actually have to take some power supply to maintain the magnetic field. So a magnetic field you could actually try to get energy from it, almost for free, a gravitational field or an electric field  you can't. OK, so now, why does that hold? Well, if I have a gradient field, then if I try to compute this 9 and take all, I know that it will be the value of a
function at the end point minus a value at the starting point, but they're the same, so the value is the same.  So if I have a gradient field, and I do the line integral, then I will get f at the n point minus f at the starting point, but have a same point, so that, OK.  So just to reinforce my warning, that not every field is a gradient field, let's look again at our favorite vector field from yesterday. So our favorite vector field yesterday was negative y and x. It's a vector field that just rotates around the original
continuous value of the
counterclockwise.  We say, if you take, say you take just the unit circle, for example, count of clockwise, well, remember we say the S study, that the line integral of f that dR, maybe I should say f that
t dS now, so because the vector field is tangent  to the circle, so on the unit circle, f is tangent to the curve, and so f that t is length f times where length t, but
t is a unit vector, so it's length f, and the length of f on the unit circle was just 1, so that's the integral of 1 d  so it's just for length of a circle, that's 2 pi, and 2 pi is
definitely not 0. So this vector field is not conservative. And so now, we know, actually, it's not the gradient of anything, because if it was, if it were gradient, then it would be conservative, and it's not.  is not conservative, it's not path independent, and
dependent either, by the way, because if I go from here to here along the upper half circle or under the lower, along the lower half circle, in one case, I will get pi, in the other case, I will get negative pi, I don't get the same answer, and so on and so on, it just fails to have all of these properties.  not conservative, not by f in the p-independence, it's not a gradient, it doesn't have any of these properties.  questions? Yes? How do you determine whether something is a gradient of a gradient of? Well, that's what we will see on Tuesday.  OK, yes? So if it's not supposed to be a little bit of a
possible draw-level third, then it's possible that the draw-level third, let's see. So you say if it's not path-independent, then we cannot draw level curves without perpendicular to it at every point, I wouldn't necessarily go that far.  if this is the gradient. I mean, you might still have, if you take this gradient field and scale it in strange way, by two in some
places, by 1 in other places, by 5 in some other places, you will get something that want to be conservative anymore, and it will still be perpendicular to the curves. So it's more subtle than that. But certainly, if it's not conservative, then it's not a gradient, and you cannot do what we say  And how to decide whether I test or not that will be choose this, the big. So for now, I just want to figure out, again, let's now state all these properties.  Actually, let me first do one minute of physics. So let me just tell you again, what's the physics in here. So if the first field is the gradient of a potential  So I'll still keep my plus sign, so maybe if you say this is
minus physics, so the work of f is the change in value of potential from one endpoint to the other endpoint point.  And so you might know about the value of a, oops, value of a, a rational field or electrical,  gravitational or electrical potential. And in case you haven't done any A2 or 2 yet, electrical potential is also
commonely known as voltage. It's the one that makes it hurt when you stick your fingers into the socket.  And so now, with conservativeness means no energy can be extracted for free from the field.  that you can't just have a particular particular moving in that field and
going on indefinitely, faster and faster or if it's actually friction, then keep moving. So total energy is conserved. And I guess that's why we call that conservative.  OK, so let's end with a recap of the S equivalent properties.  that the vector field is that it's conservative. So to say that a vector field is conservative means that the line integral is 0 along
any closed curve, c, maybe to clarify, so along all closed curves,  every closed curve, I get 0. So now I claim this is the same thing as a second
property, which is that the line integral of f is path independent. So that means if I have two paths with the same endpoints, then I will get always the same  Well, let's say that I'm path independent, if I'm path independent, then if I take a closed curve, well, it has the same
and point as just the curve that doesn't move at all. So path independent, it tells me instead of going all around, I could just say where I am, and then the work would be just 0.  well, so I have two points, and I have two paths between them. I want to show that the work is the same.  But if I get 0 on c1 minus c2, it means that the work on c1 and the work on c2 are the same. So it's the same. It's just a different way to think about the situation. More things that are equivalent, you have two more things to say, the third one, it's equivalent to f being a gradient
field.  So this is equivalent to the third property, f is a gradient field.  So that it's a gradient field, then we've seen that we get these properties
out of a fundamental theorem. Question is, if I have a conservative or path-independent vector field, why is it the gradient of something?  So that, actually, let me just say that will be how we find the potential. So how do we find the potential? Well, let's say that I know the value of my potential here. Actually, I get to choose what it is. Remember, in physics, the potential is defined up to adding or subtracting a constant, what matters is only a change in
partential. So let's say I know my potential here, and I want to know my potential  here. What do I do? Well, I take my favorite
particle, and they move it from here to here, and they look at the work done, and that tells me how much for potential has changed, so that tells me what the potential should be here. And this does not depend on my chose of path, because I assume that I'm not independent.  is the same, so all that stuff is the same as also for, if I look at m dx plus n dy is what's called an exact differential. So what that means, an exact differential means it can be put in the form df for some function f. And I'm just a way of
formulating this thing, because  I'm saying, just I can put it in the form f sub x d x plus f sub y dy, which means my vector
field was a great infield, so these things are really the same. So after the weekend on Tuesday, we'll actually figure out how to decide whether these things hold or not and how to find the product.