 The following content is provided under a Creative Commons Commons license, your support will help MIT open courseware continue to offer high-quality
educational resources for free to make a donation or to view additional materials from hundreds of MIT courses, visit MIT open courseware at ocw.mit.edu.  we learned about the cross product of vectors in space. So remember, the definition of
cross product is in terms of this determinant, I had j had k hat and then the components of a, a1, a2, a3, and then the components of b.  this is not an actual determinant because these are not numbers, but it's a simple notation to remember what the actual
formula is, and the actual formula is obtained by expanding for the determinant. So we have, actually, this smaller determinant, a2, a3, b2, b3 times I hat, minus the determinant of a1, a3, b1, b3 times j  plus the determinant of a1, a2, b1, b2 times k hat. And we also saw a more geometric definition of a cross product. So we've learned that the length of a cross product is equal to the RL of the
parallelogram  with sides a and b. We've also learned that the direction of a cross product is given by the
kering the direction that's  to a and b, so in fact, if I draw a and b in a plane, the
statement of a plane together, then the cross product should go in the direction that's perpendicular to that plane. Now, there's two different possible directions that are perpendicular to a plane, and to decide which one it is, we use the right handle  which says if you extend your right hand in the direction of
election of vector a, then curve your fingers in the direction of b, then your thumb will go in the direction of the cross product. So one thing I didn't quite get to say last time is that there are some many manipulation rules, what are we allowed to do or not do with cross product?  you write away the way for most surprising one, maybe if you've
never seen it before, it's that a equals b and b plus a are not the same thing. Why are we not the same thing? Well, one way to see it is to think geometrically. Sure, the parallelogram still has the same error, and it's still in the same plane, so it's still perpendicular to the same plane, but what happens is if you try to apply the  write a hand hold, but the exchanging the whole of a and b, then you will either, in
jigger yourself, or you will end up pointing in the opposite direction. So in fact, b plus a and a plus b are opposite of each other, and you can check that on the formula, because c, for example, the i component is a2, b, b3, minus a, b2, if you swap the whole of a and b, you will also have to change the signs.  But you'll see, one easily adjusts to it. It just means, it just means, it's just the
resist the temptation to find a, b equals b a, whenever you do that, put a minus sign. Now, in particular, well, what happens if I do a plus a? Well, I will get 0. And there's many ways to see that, when it's to use a formula, also you can say just that the parallelogram  by a and a is completely flat, and it has a real 0, so that's the 0 vector. So hopefully you've got practice with
cost products and computing them in recitation yesterday.  So let's say that I'm given three points in space, and I want to find the
equation of a plane that contains them, so say have p1, p2, p3, three points in space, well, the determinant plane, I mean, at least if they're not aligned, and we would like to find the equation of a plane that they determine.  well, the equation of the plane, let's say the plane containing p1, p2, and p3, so that means we need to find a condition on the
cordinate x, yz telling us what  whether p is in the plane or not. So we have several ways of doing that. For example, one thing we could do, let me just backtrack to the
determinance that we saw last time. So one way to think about it is to consider this vector's p1, p2, p1, p3,  and p1p. So the question of whether they're all in the same plane is the same as asking ourselves, whether the parallel epipad that they form is
actually a completely flattened form. If I try to form a parallel epipad with these free sides, well, if p is not in the plane, then it will have some volume, but if p is in the plane, that means that it's actually completely  one way to think of the equation of a plane should be that the
determinate of these vectors should be 0, determinant of p1, p2, p1, p3, and, actually, let me do it in a different order, it doesn't really matter.  if a determinant of these free vectors has to be 0. And if I'm given coordinates for these points, I'm not giving
you numbers, but if I gave you numbers, then you would be able to plug these numbers in, so you could compute these two vectors explicitly, you would have numbers here. But here, of course, this would depend on x, y and g. So when you compute the determinant, you get a formula that involves x, y and g, and you will find that this condition on x, y, g, that's the equation of a plane.  So we're going to see more about that pretty soon. Now, let me tell you about a slightly
faster way of doing it. Actually, it's not much faster, it's pretty much the same calculation, but it's maybe more enlightening.  is the normal vector to the plane. So why is that? Well, let's say that we know how to find a vector that's perpendicular to our plane. Then what does it mean for the point p to be in the plane? Well, it means that the direction from p1 to p has to be perpendicular to this vector n.  So p is in the plane only when, well, exactly when the vector p1p is perpendicular to n, where n is some vector that's perpendicular to the plane, so that's called a normal vector, not that the other side  So how do we replace this condition? Well, we've learned how to detect whether two vectors are perpendicular to each other
using dot product, that product, that's the first lecture. So these two vectors are perpendicular, exactly when they're dot product is 0.  have a point p1 given to us, and say we have been able to
compute the vector n, then when we actually compute what happens, here we will have a coordinate xyz of a point p, and we'll get some condition on xyz, that will be the equation of a plane again.  how to find vectors perpendicular to 2 given vectors. So we know two vectors in that plane, for example, p1, p2, and p1, p3, I should have used an other
permutation of a point, but let's use these. So if I want to find a vector that's perpendicular to both p1, p2, and p1, p3 at the same time, all I have to do is take that cross product.  well, the answer is we can just take the cross product p1p2,
cross p1p3. I should say, say that actually you took the point in a different order, you did p1p3, cross p1p2, you would get, of course, the opposite vector, but it's fine, any plane has, actually, infinitely, many
infinity, many normal vectors.  by any constant, you will still get a
normal vector, that's absolutely fine. So that's going to be one of the main uses of dot product c, when we know two vectors in a plane, it lets us find the normal vector to the plane, and that is what we need to find the equation.  the condition that we have is that p1p dot n should be 0. And we say n is actually p1p2 plus p1p3, so this is what we want to be 0. Now, if you remember from a long time ago, that was Friday, then we've introduced this thing and called it the triple product  And what we've seen is that the triple product is the same thing as the
determineant. So in fact, these two ways of thinking, one saying that the box formed by these free vectors should be flat and have volume 0, and the other one saying that we can find a normal vector and then express the condition that a vector is in the plane if it's perpendicular to the normal vector,  actually giving us the same
formula in the end. Any quick questions before we move on?  they're always equal to each other, if they're always the same. And now, if a point is not in the plane, then the new
minorical value of value will be non-zero, if p is in the plane, it will be 0.  So probably some of you have seen about matrices a little bit in high school, but certainly not all of you. And so let me just introduce you to a little bit about matrices just enough for what we'll need later in this class. I should say, if you want to know everything about the secret life of matrices, when you should take 1806, so what's going to be our motivation for matrices  is, well, in life, a lot of things are related by linear formulas. And even if they are not, maybe sometimes you can
approximate them by linear formulas. So, often, we have linear relations between variables.  And for example, if we do a change of coordinate
systems, so for example, say that we're in space, and we have a point, so it's coordinates, it might be, let me  in my initial coordinate system, but then maybe I need to actually switch to different
cordinates to better serve my problem because it's more adapted to other things I will do in my problem, and so I have other coordinate x's, and then in these new coordinates, well, it will have actually different coordinates, let me call them say, you want you to you free, and then the relation between the old and the new coordinate is going to be by linear formulas.  I mean, especially if I choose the same origin, I've always there
might be constant terms, which I will not insist on. So let me just give an example, for example, maybe, let's say, for example, you 1 could be 2xx1 plus 3 times x2 plus 3 times x  u2 might be 2 times x1 plus 4 times x2 plus 5 times x3, u3 might be x1 plus x2 plus 2x3. Do not ask me where these numbers come from, I just made them up.  Now, in order to express this kind of linear relation, we can use matrices. So a matrix is just a table with numbers in it. And so we can reformulate this in terms of matrix multiplication or matrix product. So instead of writing this, I will write that the matrix  2, 3, 3, 3, 2, 4, 5, 1, 1, 2 times the vector, x1, x2, x3 is equal to u1, u2, u3. So hopefully you see that there's the same
information content on both sides, I just need to explain to you what this way  multiplying tables of numbers means, well, what it means is really that we'll take
exactly these quantities, but let me just say that more symbolically. So maybe this matrix we could call a, and this we could call x, and this we could call capital U, x, then we'll say a times x equals you, which is a lot shorter  that, of course, I need to tell you what a, x and u are in terms of their entries for you to get
reform you, but it's convenient notation. So what does it mean to do a matrix product? So the entries in product, so I should say, in the matrix product,  obtained by doing the dot product, so let's say we're
doing the product ax. So we do a dot product between the rows, that product, between the rows of a and the columns of x. So maybe I should say here,  a is a free by free matrix, that just means there's free rows and free columns, and x is the
coronum vector, which we can think of as a free by 1 matrix, it has free rows and only one column.  product between a row of a, 2, 3, 3, 3, and the
coronum of x, x1, x2, x3, well, that dot product will be 2 times x1 plus 3 times x2 plus 3 times x2 plus 3 times x3. It's exactly what we want to set you 1 equal to. Let's do the second one. I take the second row of a, 2, 4, 5, and I do the dot product with x1, x2, x3.  plus 5 times x3, which is this thing, and same with a third one, 1 times x1 plus 1 times x2 plus 2 times x3. So that's matrix multiplication.  of a product of two matrices, a and b, so I'm saying matrices, that they could be, of course, vectors are now a
special case of matrices, just by taking a matrix of width 1.  So, let's say, for example, this works in any
sizes, so let's say that a is for a free by 4 matrix, so it has three rows for columns, and here I'm not going to give you the values, because I'm not going to compute everything, it would take for rest of a lecture.  have the second column of the second
column is 0, 3, 0, 2. So a times b, I claim, the entries should be the dot product between these rows and these columns. Here we have two columns, here we have 3 rows, so we should get 3 times 2 different possibilities, and so the answer will have size 3 by 2.  because I didn't give you numbers, but one of them we can compute. We can compute the one that goes here, namely this one, in the second
second column, so I select the second column of B, and in the first row, so I take the first row of A, and I find, well, 1 times 0, 2 times free, 6 plus 0 plus 0 plus 8 should make 14. So this entry here is 14.  to set it up so that you remember more easily how what goes where. So one way that you can set it up is you can put a here, you can put b up here, and then you will get the answer here. And if you want to find what goes in a given slot here, then you just look to it's left and you look above it, and you do a product  between these guys. So that's, I think, an easy way to remember, first of all, it tells you what the size of the answer will be, the
size will be, what fits nicely in this box should have a same width as B in the same height as A. And second, it tells you which that product to compute for each position, so you just look at what's to the left and what's above the given position.  to play anything by anything, well, no, I wouldn't have asked the question of y, but anyway, c, to be able to do this product product, we need to have the same number of entries here and here, over y's, we can't say take this times that plus this times, and so on, if we run out of space on one of them before the other.  is that the width of a must equal the height of b.  we know how to multiply matrices. So what does it mean to multiply matrices? I mean, of course, we've seen, on this example, that we can use the matrix to tell us how to transform from x's to use. And that's an example of multiplication. But now, let's say that we have two matrices like that,
telling us how to transform from something to something  thing else, what does it mean to multiply? So I claim that if a product a, b, represents doing first the transformation  So that's a slightly counter-intuitive thing, because we're used to writing things from
left to right, unfortunately, with matrices that we've done, you multiply things from right to left. If you think about it, when you have two functions f and g, you write f of g of x, it's  So why is this? Well, if I write a, b times x, where x is some vector that I want to transform, it's the same as a times bx. So this property is called associativity, and it's a good property of well-behaved product, not of cross product by the way.  and multiply them in which of our order we want, we can start with bx or we can start with a, b. So now, bx means we apply the
transformation b to x, and then multiplying by a means we apply the transformation a. So we first apply b, then we apply a, but it's the same as applying a, b, all at once.  Another note of warning is that a, b, and b, are not the same thing at all. You probably see that already from this
interprety, and it's not the same thing to converges to bananas, then to carrots, or vice versa.  if the width of a equals the height of b, we can do this product, we don't necessarily, I mean, it's not clear that the width of b will equal the height of a, which is what we would need for that one. So the size condition to be able to do the product might not make sense, maybe one of them doesn't even make sense, even if it both make sense,
that you're usually
completely different things.  OK, the next thing I need to tell you is something called the identity matrix. Well, the identity matrix is the matrix that does nothing. So what does it mean to the nothing? I don't mean the matrix 0, the matrix 0 would take x and would always give you back 0, that's not a very
interesting transformation.  So it satisfies property i, so it's called i, and it has a property that x equals x for all x. So it's the transformation from something to itself, it's the
obvious transformation called the identity transformation. So how do we write that as a matrix?  size. So, for example, the identity matrix of size free by free has entries 1, 1, 1, 1 on the
diagonal, and 0's every well. OK, let's check if we multiply this with a vector, well, maybe I should do that, I'm not  of x.  So let's say I multiply the matrix I with a vector x1, x2, x3, what will be the first entry? It will be the dot product between 1, 0, 0, and x1, x2, x3. If you want this vector is I hat. So if you do the dot product with I hat, you will get the first
component, that will be x1, 1 times x1,  1 plus 0, 0, 0. Similarly, here, if I do the dot product, I get 0 plus x2 plus 0, I get x2, and
here I get x3, it works. Same thing if I put here a matrix, I will get back the same matrix.  think with ones on the diagonal and 0's, every where else. You just put 1 at every diagonal
position and 0 as well, and then you can see if you multiply that by your vector, you will get the same vector back.  let me give you another example of a matrix. Let's say that in the plane, we look at the transformation that does rotation by 9 to the
degrees, let's say counterclockwise.  So I claim that this is given by the matrix 0, 1, minus 1, 0. So let's try to see why that is the case.  I hat will be 1, 0, this product, well, here you will get 0, and then you will get 1, you get j-hat.  Well, you get negative 1, and then you get 0, so that's minus i-hat, so j is sent towards here. And in general, if you apply it to a vector with
cordinates xy, with components xy, then you will get back minus yx, which is the formula we've seen for rotating a vector by 90 degrees.  So it seems to do what we want. By the way, I should point out the theorems in this matrix, what happens to each
basis vector, to the vectors I and j.  here. So what's interesting about this matrix? Well, we can do computations with matrices in a way that are
easier of inviting coordinate change formulas. For example, if you compute R squared, so if you multiply R with itself, well, I let you do it as an exercise, but you will find that you get minus 1, minus 1, 1, 1, 0, 0, 0,  that's minus the identity matrix, y is that? Well, if I rotate something by 90 degrees, and then I rotate by 90 degrees again, then I will rotate by your 180 degrees, that means I will
actually just go to the opposite point around the origin. So I will take xy to minus x minus y. And if I applied R4 times R to the 4 would be identity.  OK, questions? Yes?  last time, or the first lecture, is that to rotate a vector by 90 degrees, we should change xy to minus yx.  y, and then v equals 1x plus 0y, 1x plus 0y, so that's how I would find it. Here, I just
just gave it to you, you know, ready made. So you didn't really see how I found it.  So next, I need to tell you how to invert matrices. So what's the point of matrices, it's that it gives us a nice way to think about these
changes of variables, and in particular, if we know how to express you in terms of x, maybe we'd like to know how to express x in terms of you. Well, we can do that because we've learned how to solve linear systems like this. So in principle, we could start to work in
substituting and so on,  to find formulas for the x1, x2, x3, x3 as functions of
u1, 2, 2, and u3, and the relation will be again, a linear relation. It will again be given by a matrix. Well, what's that matrix? It's the inverse transformation, so it's the inverse of a matrix a. So we're going to learn how to find the inverse of a matrix directly.  So the inverse of a by definition is a matrix M with a property that if I multiply  M, then I get identity, and if I multiply M by a, I also get identity, if a two properties are equivalent. So that means if I apply first the transformation a, then the transformation M, I actually undo the transformation a and vice versa. These two transformations are the opposite of each other, well, I should say the
interverse of each other.  we need a must be a square matrix, so it must have a
size n by n can be any size, but it must be the same number of hose as columns. And it's a general fact that you will see more in detail in linear algebra if you take it.  So the matrix M, we will denote by a inverse, like this. And then what is it good for, well, for example, the solution to a linear system? So what's a linear
system in our new language? It's a matrix times some unknown vector x equals some non-vector B.  which just compute x equals a inverse b. Why does that work? How do I get from here to here? Let's be careful.  So I'm saying if ax equals b, then let's multiply both sides by a and
value.  a inverse times ax is a inverse b, and then, well, a inverse times a is
identity, so I get x equals a inverse b. That's how I solved my system of equations. So if you have a calculator that can invert matrices, when you can solve linear systems very quickly, now we should still learn how to compute this thing.  How do I know that a inverse will be on the left of b and not after it? Well, it's exactly in this derivation, so if you're ever not
true, then just reproduce this calculation. To get from here to here, what I did is I multiplied things on the left by a inverse, and then this guy simplify. If I had put a inverse on the right, I would have a, x, a inverse, which might not make sense, and even if it makes sense, it doesn't simplify.  So the basic whole is, you have to multiply it by a in
verse on the left so that it can start with this a that's on the left.  it's not sized, you cannot take x times a if a and x, if a is a square matrix, and x is a
coronum vector, this product makes sense, the other one doesn't make sense, it's not the right size. So what we need to do is to learn how to invert a matrix, and it's useful to know first for your general knowledge, and second,  actually, it's actually useful for things we'll see in this class. So in particular, on the exam, you will need to know how to
invertemetrex by hand. So I should say this formula is actually good for small matrices, free by free, 4x4, it's not good at all if you have a matrix of size of 1,000 by 1,000. So in computer software, for small matrices, we do this, for larger matrices, we use over  while go evens, but let's just see how we do it. So I'm going to do it, so first of all, I will give you a
final answer, and of course, for that I will need to explain what the answer means. So we'll have to compute something called the adjoint matrix, and I will tell you how to do that, and then we'll divide by the determinant of a.  So how do we get to the adjoint matrix? So let's go for the steps on a free by free example.  that was the one relating x's and L's, and L's use. So the first thing I want to do is find what's
called the minus. So what's a minus? Well, it's a slightly smaller determinant. We've already seen them without calling them that way.  minus will have again the same size. Let's say we want this entry, then we just
delete this row and this column, so this row and this column, and we are left with a 2 by 2 by 2 determinant. So here we'll put for determinant 4, 5, 1, 2, which is 4 times 2, 8 minus 5, 3.  5 is negative 1, then minus 2, then I get to the second row, so I get to this entry, well, to find the
minor here, I will delete this row and this column, and I'm left with free, free 1, 2, 3 times 2, minus 3 is free. And let me just cheat and give you the others. I think I've shown you that I can do them.  So let's just explain the last one again, the last one, this 2, so to find the minus here, I
delete this column and this whole, and I take this determinant 2 times 4 minus 2 times 3. So it's the same kind of manipulation that we've seen when we've taken determinants and cross-products.  are pretty much the same thing as the minus, except the
sines are slightly different. So what we do is we flip signs according to a checker board and diagram, so you start with a plus in the upper left corner, and you alternate pluses and minuses.  there, then there's a minus next to it and below it, and then below a minus or to the right
for minus, there's a plus, so that's what it looks inside free by free. So what do I mean by that? I don't make this positive, make this negative, and so on, that's not what I mean.  and we flip the sign. So here we get, well, free, then 1 minus 2, minus 3, 1 plus 1, the output plus is just to emphasize 3, minus 4 and 2.  this one, because you have to compute all of these two by two
determinets. By the way, I mean, this minus sign here, it's actually very related to the way in which, when we do a cross product, we have a minus sign for the second entry.  So what does it mean to transpose? It means you read the rows of your matrix and you
write that as columns, or vice versa. So let me just say we switch rows and columns. So what do we get? Well, let's just read it horizontally and write it vertically.  b minus 4, 2, 3, minus 4, 2, that's pretty easy. And we're almost done for the last step, so what we get here is this is the adjoint matrix. So the fourth and last step is to divide by the determinant of a.  so I should say, the determinant of a, not the determinant of this guy.  a free, 1, 1, 1 minus 4, minus 2, 1, 2. And now, so that tells us, remember, a,
tell us how to find the use in terms of the x's, this one tells us now how to find the x's in terms of the use. If you multiply you 1, you 2, you 3 by this, you get x, x1, x2, x3. It also tells you how to solve the linear system, a times x equals something.  OK, that's the end for today.