 The following content is provided under a Creative Commons Commons license, your support will help MIT open courseware continue to offer high-quality
educational resources for free to make a donation or to view additional materials from hundreds of MIT courses, visit MIT open courseware at ocw.mit.edu.  And how it relates, how they relate to linear systems and matrices as we have
sewn, during Tuesday's lecture. So let's start again with equations of planes. So remember, we've seen, briefly, that an equation for a plane  a, is of a form, ax plus by plus cz equals d, where a, b, c and d are just numbers. And so this x plus is the condition, for a point, at
cordinates x, yz to be in the plane. And so an equation of this form defines a plane.  So let's see how that works again. So let's start with an example, let's say that we want to find an
equation for the plane for the origin with normal vector, let's say,  vector n equals, let's say, the normal
vector 1, 5, then. So how do we find an equation of this plane? Well, remember that we can get that equation by thinking, geometrically. So what's our thinking going to be?  is the x is, and we have this vector n, 1, 5, n, and it's supposed to be perpendicular to our plane, and our plane passes
for the origin here. So we want to think of a plane that's perpendicular to this vector,  Well, when is a point in that plane? Let's say we have a point p, at c to the x
yz, well, the condition for p to be in the plane should be that we have a right angle here.  is 0. And if we write that explicitly, well, vector O p has components x, y
z and has components 1, 5, 10, so that will give us x plus 5y plus 10z equals 0. That's the equation of our plane.  a slightly different problem. So let's do another problem, let's try to find the
equation of a plane for a point p0, we've coordinates, say, 2, 1 minus 1, and with normal vector, again, the same guy, 1, 510. So how do we find an equation of this thing?  Well, we are going to use the same method, in fact, let's think first for a second. So I said we have a normal vector n, and it's going to be perpendicular to both planes at the same time. So in fact, our two planes will be parallel to each other.  f of n equal R to n and passing for the origin, and now we have a new
plane that's going to pass, well, not for the origin, but for maybe this point p0, and I don't claim the way it is, but let's say, for example, that p0 is here, then I will just have to shift my plane so that instead of passing for the origin, it passes for this new point.  So how are we going to do that? Well, now, for a point p to be in our new plane, we need for a vector, no longer
up, but p0p to be perpendicular to n. So p is in this new plane if the vector p0p is perpendicular to n, and now let's think  for a second, what's vector p0p? Well, we take the
cordinets of p and we subtract those of p0. So that should be x minus 2, y minus 1, and z plus 1, dot product with 1, 510, equals 0.  5 times y minus 1 plus 10 times z plus 1 equals 0, let's put the constant on the other side, we get x plus 5y plus 10z equals, well, here we have minus 2, minus 5, plus 5, 10, 10,
becomes minus 10, I think we end up with negative 3.  So, see, the only thing that changes between these two
equations is the constant term on the right-hand side, the thing that I call d. And the other common feature is that the coefficients of x, y and z, 1, 5, and 10, correspond exactly to the normal vector. So that's something you should remember about planes.  far, when you move from, so if you have a plane through the origin, the right hand side
will be 0, and if you move to a parallel plane, then this number will become something else. So how actually could we have found that minus free more quickly? Well, we know that the first part of the equation is like this. And we know something else, we know that the point p0 is in the plane.  into this, well, x is 2 plus 5 times 1 plus 10 times minus 1, we get minus 3. So in fact, the number we should have here should be minus 3 so that p0 is a solution.  And one way that we can get this number here is by computing the value of the left-hand side at the point p0, we plug in the point p0 into the left-hand side.  by the way, of course, a plane doesn't have just one
equation, it has infinitely many equations because if I take instead, say, if I multiply everything by 2, 2x plus 10y plus 20z equals minus 6 is also an equation for this plane.  So again, just to repeat for a single, most important thing here, in the equation, a, x plus b, y plus c is equals d, the coefficients a, b, c, give us, actually, a
normal vector to the plane.  So that's why, in fact, what matters to us, mostly, is finding the
normal vector, and in particular, if you remember, last time, I explained something about how we can find a normal vector to replace  So let's just do an example to see if we completely understand what's going on.  with components 1, 2, negative 1, and I give you the
plane x plus y plus y plus 3z equals 5. So do you think that this vector is parallel to the plane, the upper inequality  So I see that most of you are answering number 2, this vector is perpendicular to the plane, there are some other
inserts too, well, let's try to figure it out.  let's do the example, say, the
v is 1, 2, negative 1, and the plane is x plus y plus fz equals 5, so let's just throw that plane anywhere, it doesn't really matter, let's first get a normal vector out of it.  take the coefficients of x, yn, and z, so that's 1, 1, 1, 3. So 1, 1, 1, 3 is
beta-paparne-kueh-do-do to the plane. How do we get all the other vectors that
prepaparne-kueh-do-do-to-the-plane, that are perpendicular to the plane? Well, all the perpendicular vectors are parallel to each other, so that means that if they're just obtained by maybe multiplying this guy by some number, 2, 2, 2, 6, for example, would still be  1 1 1 1, 3 halves is also a
bath and a cure out to the plane. But now, see, this guy is not proportional to each other, so v is not  being perpendicular to the plane is the same as being parallel to
it's normal vector. Now, what about testing if v is instead parallel to the plane? Well, it's parallel to the plane if it's perpendicular to n.  to n. Well, let's do b dot n, that's 1, 2, negative 1, dot 1, 1, 1, 3, if you get 1 plus 2 minus 3, that's 0. So yes, so if it's
partly, if it's perpendicular to n, means  maybe it's, so well, I like that, it's actually going to be parallel to the plane.  the fact that there into the S-line equation, you get 0, what is the
what's the thing that gets? Ah, when you plug, let's see. So if I plug the vector into the plane equation, so x1 plus 2 minus f, well, the left-hand side becomes 0, so it's not a solution of a plane equation.  So that's two different things here. One is the point we've
coordinates 1, 2 minus 1 is not in the plane. So what that tells us is that if I put my vector v at the origin, then the point here is not going to be in the plane.  on the other hand, you're right, the left-hand side
evaluate to 0. What that means is if instead they had taken the plane x plus y plus x plus y plus 3 is equal 0, then it would be inside, and the plane x plus y, so this one is x plus y plus x plus y plus 3 is equal to x plus y plus 3 is equal 0, would be a plane parallel to it, but for the origin.  is parallel to the plane, if we move a plane to a parallel plane for the origin, then the end point of the
vector is in the plane. That's an other way to convince yourselves.  So last time we saw about matrices, we learned about matrices and linear systems. So let's try to think now about linear
systems in terms of equations of planes and intersections of planes. Remember, a linear system, it's a bunch of equations, let's say, a free by free linear system, it's three different equations, each of the equation is the equation of a plane.  point, but it's on several planes at the same time.  I give you, but let's say I give you x plus z equals 1, x plus y equals 2, x plus 2y plus x plus bz equals 3, what does this mean to solve this?  first equation first, when first equation says our point should be on the
plane, which has this equation, then the second equation says, oh, our point should also be on this plane.  So these two equations determine for you two planes and two planes intersect in a line.  So if we want to solve the first two equations, we have to be on this line, and if we want to solve a third one, we also need to be on another plane, and in general, three planes intersect in a point, because this line of intersection,  So if there are planes intersect in a point, and one way to think about it is that the line with a first two
points, so if a line with a first two planes intersect, meets the third plane in a point, and that point is the solution to the linear system.  intersect the third plane in a point, which is going to be the solution. So the solution, actually, how do we find it? Well, one way is to draw a picture and try to figure out what the solution is, but that's not how we do it in practice if we
are given the
equations.  for solution is, so let me use a notation, remember, we so on Tuesday, that the
solution to a, x equals b is given by x equals a and b. And we get from here to here by multiplying on the left by a inverse, a inverse a, x simplifies to x, equals a  in verse B. And once again, it's a in verse B and not B a inverse, if you try to set up a multiplication, B inverse
doesn't work, the sides are not compatible, you can't multiply the other way around.  And what could go wrong? Well, let's say that our first two planes
do intersect nicely in the line, but let's think about the third plane, maybe the third plane does not intersect that line nicely in a point, maybe it's actually parallel to that line.  So let's say that the set of solutions to a free by free linear
system is not just one point. So we don't have a unique solution that we can get this way. What could happen? What do you think could happen?  also a bit of answer number 1, and in fact, these are pretty good answers. I see even some of you figured out that you can
answer 1 and 3 at the same time, or 3 and 5 at the same time, I yet have to see somebody with 3 hands, and so all 3 numbers at the same time.  Well, two points, two solutions, we will see is not actually a possibility, because if you have two different solutions, then the
antar line for these two points is also going to be made of solutions. Etitra-Hydroin is just there to a museum, it's not actually a good answer to that question. It's not very likely that you will get a tetra-Hydro-Nout of intersecting planes. A plane is in the possible, and I don't know if it's still OK for a few more minutes,  but we are going to get to the bottom of this and
we will know. So let's try to figure out what can happen. So let me go back to my picture, and so I had my first two planes, if it did, I'm in line, and now I have my third plane, and maybe my third plane is actually parallel to the line,  then I'm afraid that there's no solutions, because to solve the
system of equations, I need to be in the first two planes, so that means I need to be in that vertical line, well, the line was supposed to be a red, but I guess it doesn't show up as red. And it also needs to be in the third plane, but the line and the plane are parallel to each other, there's just no place where they intersect, so there's no way to solve all the equations.  the other thing that could happen is that actually the line is
contained in the plane. And then, well, it means any point on that line will actually solve automatically the third equation. So if you try solving a system that looks like this by hand, what you will notice, if you do substitution,  here, would actually turn out to be the same as what you get
out of a first 2. It doesn't give you any additional information, it's as if you had only two equations. The previous case would be when, actually, if a third equation contradicts something that you can get out of a first 2, for example, maybe out of a first 2, you get x plus g equals 1, and the third equation is x plus g equals 2, well, it can't be 1 and 2 at the same time.  is that this picture is one where you can get out of the
equations, you get a number equals a different number, that's impossible, and that picture is one where out of the equations you get 0 equals 0, which is certainly true, but isn't a very useful equation, so you can't actually finish solving.  I say it is, by the l, 2 of line, where p1 and p2 in delsect, so then there's two sub cases if l  of intersections of p1 and p2 is actually
contained in p3 in the third plane, then we have infinitely many solutions, namely, any point on the line will automatically  Now, the other possibility, the other sub k's is if the line of intersection of p1 and p2  is parallel to p free and not contained in it, then we get no solutions.  So again, just to show you a bit just once again, when we have the first two planes that give us a line, and now, depending on what happens to that line in relation to the third plane, various situations can happen. So if the third line, if a line hits the third plane in a point, then that's going to be our solution.  well, if it's parallel and outside of it, when we have no solution, if it's parallel and
contained in it, actually, then we have infinitely many solutions.  And what we've seen that happens when the line with the first two planes intersect is parallel to the third one, that exists, two points, well, but
didn't come up. And as I said, the problem is if the line of intersection of the first two planes actually has two points that are in the third plane, well, then that means, actually, the
entity of the n-tie-all-line must also be in the third plane. So if you have two solutions, and you have more than two  In fact, you have infinitely many, and we've seen that can happen. Tetra Hadwan's tellers don't look very promising. What about a plane? Well, that's a case that I didn't explain, because I've been assuming that p1 and p2 are
of different planes, and they intersect in a line. But in fact, they could be parallel, in which case we already have no so  And now, if a third plane is also the same plane, if all three planes are the same plane, well, then you have a
plane of solutions. If I give you three times the same equation that is a linear system, it's not a very interesting one, but it is a linear system.  OK, so that's a very good question. Question is, what is the geometric
significant of an equation like x plus y plus 0, say this one equals 1, 2, 1, 2, 3, or something else? Well, if the equation is x plus y plus y plus
y equals 0, it means that our plane is passing for the origin. And then if we change for constant, it means we move to a parallel plane.  have is that this number on the right-hand side is the distance between the origin and the plane. It tells us how far from the
orgin we are, that is not quite true, in fact, that would be true if the coefficients here form the unit vector, then this guy would just be the distance to the origin. Otherwise, you have to actually scale by the length of this
normal vector, and I think there's a problem in the notes that  so you exactly how this works. But you should think of it roughly as how much have we moved the plane away from the origin?  let's try to think about what exactly this case, how do we detect now in which situation we are? Because that's all very nice in the picture, but it's difficult to draw planes.  of matrices, in particular, what's wrong with this? Why can't we always say the solution
is x equals a and a in verse b? Well, so the point is, actually, you cannot always in delta matrix. So recall, we've seen this formula that a in verse is one of L  times the adjoint matrix, and well, we've learned how to compute this thing, remember, we had to take minus, then
flip some sides and then transpose. Well, that's step we can always do, we can always do these calculations, but then at the end, we have to divide by the determinant.  in fact, what I didn't mention last time is that for matrix is invertible,
that means it has an inverse, exactly when it's determinant is not 0. So that's something we should remember. So if a determinant is not 0, then we can use a method to find the inverse, and then we can solve using this method.  not than 0. That's correct. So what I'm saying is we can, in the value of a, if a
determineat is not 0, and if you look again at the method that we saw last time, so first we had to compute this a joint matrix, and these operations we can always do, if we are given a free by a free matrix, we can always compute the a joint, and then the last step to find the infers was to divide by the  And that we can only do if the determinant is not 0. So if we have a matrix with the
determinate is not 0, then we know how to find the inverse. If the determinant is 0, then, of course, this method doesn't work, but I'm saying, even more, there isn't an inverse at all. It's not just that the only thing that fails, I cannot take the inverse of a matrix with the determinant 0.  If a situation where the determinant is not 0 is exactly this nice, a useful situation where the three
plains intersect at a point, while the situation where the determinant is 0 is this situation here, where the line determining by the first two planes is parallel to the third plane.  And let's see again, what happens. So let's start with an
easier case. So it's called the case of a homogeneous system, it's called homogeneous, because it's the situation where the equations  and thus scaling. So the homogeneous system is one where the right-hand side is 0. There's no b, if you want, for constant terms here, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0. So this one is not homogeneous. So let's see what happens there.  plus z equals 0, x plus y equals 0, and x plus 2y plus f of x
of bz also equals 0. Well, can we solve these equations? I think, actually, you already know a very simple solution to these equations.  and obvious solution, namely 0, 0, 0, and in mathematical jump, on this is
called the trivial solution. So there's always this trivial solution, and what's the geometric interpretation?  So having 0's here means that all free planes pass for the origin. So
so certainly, the origin is always a solution.  plus for the origin. So now there's two sub k's, one k's is if a determinant of a matrix
a is non-zero, well, that means that we can invert a.  then that means we can serve the system by multiplying by a inverse. If we multiply by a inverse, we'll get x equals a inverse times 0, which is 0. And that's the only solution.  0, we get x equals 0, we've solved it, no a absolute. So to go back to this picture, that we will enjoy, it's, no, it's viscous.  the other case, if a determinant of a equals 0, then it means that actually this
doesn't quite work. So let's see, what does it mean that the determinant of a is, well, remember, the entries in a, there are the coefficients in the equations, but now the coefficients in the equations, they're exactly the normal vectors  So that's the same thing as saying by the determinant of the free
normal vectors to L3 planes is 0.  it's called Cauchy Planner, this free vector is a Cauchy Planner. So let's see what happens. So I claim it will correspond to this situation here.  the normal vectors to my planes, well, they're all in the direction that's perpendicular to the line of
intersection, they're all in a same plane. So if I try to form a box, you know, parallel a pipette with these three normal vectors, well, I will get something that's completely flat and has no volume, has volume 0.  has volume 0. And the fact that the normal vectors of a
non-moled vectors are a couple of them, now, tells us that, in fact, let me start a new blackboard, if we, OK, so now let's say that our normal vectors, n1, n 2, and 3, are all in the same plane, and let's think about the direction  they are perpendicular to n1, n2, and n3 at the same time. I claim that will be the line of
intersection.  So let me try to draw that picture again. So we have three planes.  I draw it before hand, and I said, the normal vectors are all in the same plane. So what does do I know? I know that all these planes fast through the origin. So the origin is somewhere in the intersection of a free plane.  to my three planes, well, it's kind of hard to go a little bit, and all actually a
corpoplano, so n1, n2, and 3, they're done in a plane.  claim here, that's a table picture, it's supposed to be in all of the planes, you can see that
that on the side of the claim. And why is that? Well, that's because my line, it's perpendicular to the normal vectors, so it's parallel to the planes, it's parallel to all of the planes, now why is it in the
plane instead of the
partial to them?  that's because my line goes for the origin, and the origin is on the plane, so
certainly, my line has to be contained in the planes, not parallel to them.  is parallel to all free planes, and because the planes go through the origin, it's contained in them.  And how do I find these solutions? Well, if I want to find something that's perpendicular to n1nnn2nn3, well, if I just want to be perpendicular to n1nn2, I can take their cross product, exactly.  plus n2 is perpendicular to n1 and n2, and also to n3, because n3 is in the same claim as n1 and n2. So if you are perpendicular to n1 and n2, you're also
also perpendicular to n3, it's automatic.  this vector goes along the line of intersections. So that's the case of how much in your
systems, and then let's finish with the other case, so the general case, so that means if we look at a system a x equals b,  Well, with b now, anything, there's two cases, if the determinant of a is not 0, then there's a unique
solution, namely x equals a in verse b.  then it means, actually, we have this situation with the situation with planes that are all
paradded to a same line, and then we have either no solution or infinitely many solutions. It cannot be a single solution. Now, whether you have no solutions or infinitely, many solutions, well, we haven't actually developed the tools to  But if you try solving the system by hand by
hand by elimination, you will see that you end up maybe with something that says 0 equals 0, and you have infinite and many solutions, actually, if you can find one solution, then you know that there's infinity, many. OK.