 The following content is provided under a Creative Commons license, your support will help MIT open courseware continue to offer high-quality
educational resources for free to make a donation or to view additional materials from hundreds of MIT courses, visit MIT open courseware at ocw.mit.edu.  and how to think of free by free linear systems in terms of
intersection of planes and how to think about them geometrically, and that in particular, let us to see in which cases, actually, we don't have a unique solution to the system, but maybe we have no solutions or infinitely, maybe the line of intersection of two of a planes happens to be parallel to the other plane.  they will start by looking at the
equations of lines, and so in a way, it seems like something that we've already seen last time, because we have seen that we can think of a line as the intersection  of two planes, and we know what equations of planes look like. So we could describe a line by two
equations, then I guess about the two planes, but intersect on the line, that's not the most convenient way to think about a line usually, because when you have these two equations, how do you solve them?  of a line. So if you have a line in space, well, you can imagine maybe that you have a point on it, and that point is moving in time, and the line is the trajectory of a point as time varies.  And so when we think of the trajectory of a moving point, that's
called a parametric equation. So we're going to learn about parametric equivalence of n's.  So let's say, for example, that we are looking at the line to specify a line in space, I can do that by giving you two points on the line, or by giving you a point and a vector
parallel to the line, for example.  2, and the other point will be, let's say, 1, 3, negative 1. So it's pretty good because we have two points in that line. Now, how do we find all the other points? Well, the other point in between these guys, and also an either side, let's imagine that we have a point that's moving on the line, and at times 0, it's here,  at Q0, and in a unit time, I'm not telling you what the unit is, it could be a second, could be an R, could be a
here, at t equals 1, it's going to be at Q1, and it moves at constant speed. So maybe at time 1 1 1 1, it's going to be here, time 2, it will be over over over R, and in fact, that point didn't start here, maybe it was, it's always being moving in on that line, at time minus 2, it was down there.  let's say, Q of t is a moving point, and at t equal 0, it's at Q0. And let's say that it moves, well, we could make it move in any way we want, but
probably the easiest to find, so our goal is going to find formulas  for the position of this moving point in terms of t, and we'll use that to say, well, any point on the line is of this form where you have to plug in the
correct value of t, depending on when it hits by the moving point.  of the line, and that p is chosen so that at
time 1, it's at Q1. So the question we want to answer is what is the position at a time t, so the point Q  of t. Well, to answer that, we have an easy observation, which is that the vector from c0 to
cure of t is proportional to the vector from c0 to c1. And what's the proportionality factor here?  So Q is exactly the same, maybe a few
of the one of a picture again, I have Q0, I have Q1, and after time t, I'm here at Q of t, where this vector from Q0 to Q of t is actually going to be  the vector Q0, Q1. So when t increases, it gets longer and longer. So does everybody see this now? Is that any questions about that?  I will not use blue anymore. OK, well, for this time, let me just make everything white.  pointing it out, I will switch to biteier
out quotals. So about from that, I claim now we can find the position of this moving point, because this vector R Q0, Q1, we can find, from the conates of Q0 and Q1, so we just subtract  So if I look at it, well, so let's call x of t, y of t and z of t the coordinate of the point that's moving on the line, then we get x of t minus, well,
or actually, plus 1, equals t times 2,  2, I'm writing the components of vector Q0, Q of t, and here I'm writing
times Q0, Q1, y of t minus 2 equals t and 0 of t minus 2 equals minus 3t.  way that we'll use to write these equations, let me do it that way instead, minus 1 plus 2t, y of t equals 2 plus t, 0 of t equals 2 minus 3t. And if you prefer, I can just say, Q of t is Q0 plus t times the vector  So that's our first parametric equation of a line in this class, and I hope you see it's not extremely hard.  which is 2, 1 negative 3, and for constant terms, tell us about where we are at
t equal 0, if I fact, equal 0 of these guys go away and get minus 1, 2, 2, 2, 2, that's my starting point.  So let's see, now, what we can do with this
parametric equations. So one application is to think about the relative position of a line and a plane with respect  So let's say that we take, still the same
line above there, and let's consider the plane with equation x plus 2y plus 4z equals 7. So I'm giving you this plane. And the questions that we're going to ask ourselves, well, does the line intersect  a plane and where does it intersect the plane?  just end, we have this point, we have this plane, and we have this point Q0 and Q1, I'm going to draw them in
completely random places, well, R0 and Q1 on the same side of a plane or on different sides on opposite sides of a plane.  So is that readable? Is it too small? So anyway, the question says, relative to the plane x plus 2y plus
4 is equal to y plus 4z equals 7, this point Q0 and Q1 are there on the same side, on opposite sides, is one of them on the plane, we can't decide.  be better. So I see relatively few answers, looks like also a lot of you have forgotten their cards, and so I see people raising two
things, I see people raising three fingers, and I see people raising four fingers, I don't see anyone answering  1. So the general idea of the idea seems to be that I, if I have an opposite
sides, or maybe a 1 of M is on the plane, let's try to c is 1 of M on the plane, well, let's check.  2, well, if I plug that into the plane equation, so x plus 2y plus 4z will equal minus 1 plus 2 times 2 plus 4 times 2, that's, well, 4 plus 8, 12 minus 1, 11, that I think is bigger than 7.  let's try again with Q1, 1, 3, negative 1, well, if we plug that into x plus 2y plus 4z, we'll have 1 plus 2 times 3, make 7, but we add 4 times negative 1, we end up with 3, less than 7, well, that 1 is not in the plane either, so I don't think, actually, that the
answer should be number 1,  free, so let's get rid of answer number 3. OK, let's say in the light of this, are you willing to reconsider your previous answers? And so I think now, if I want to be in question, an answer number 2, and I would agree with that answer.  these points are not in the plane, but not in the plane in different ways. 1 of M somehow over shoots, we get 11, we only get free, that's less than 7. If you think about how a plane splits space into 2, 1, 1 of M is going to be the
point square x plus 2y plus 4z is less than 7, and the other one will be, so that's somehow this side  And that's where Q1 is, and the other side is where x plus 2y plus 4z is actually
bigger than 7, and to go from 1 to the other, well, x plus 2y plus 4z need to go through a value 7. If you're moving along any path from Q0 to Q1, this thing will change  from 11 to free at some time, it has to go for 7, does that make sense? So to go from Q0 to Q1, we need to
cost p at some place, so there are no positive sides.  Now, that doesn't quite finish and so on the question that we had, which was where does the line intersect for plane? But why do we can do the same thing? Now, not only the point of
1, Q0 and Q1, we know actually, any point on the line because we have a geometric equation of L, telling us where is the point that's moving on the line at time  So what about the moving point of Q of t? Well, let's plug it's coordinates
into the plane equation, so we'll take x of t plus twice y of t plus 4, z of t, that's equal to minus 1 plus 2t plus 2t plus 2 plus 2 plus t plus 4 times  2 minus 3t, so if you simplify this a bit, you get 2t plus 2t minus 12t, that should be minus 8t, and the constant term is minus 1 plus 4 plus 8 is 11. And we have to compare that with 7. Question is, is this a value of L equal to 7?  So, Q of t is in the plane, exactly when minus 8t plus 11 equals 7, and that's the same, if you manipulate this, you will get
t equals 1.5.  pretty, you see that 7 is actually right in between, it's the average of these two numbers. So it would make sense that it's halfway in between
cute 0 and Q1 that we will get 7. And then at that time, Q at time 1 1 1, let's plug the values, so minus 1 plus 2t  2 plus t will be 2 under 1, or 5 halves, and 2 minus 3 halves
will be 1 1 1 1. So this is where the line intersects the plane.  So you see, that's actually a pretty easy way of finding where a line and a plane intersect each other, if we can find a
parametric equation of a line and an equation of a plane, then we basically just plug 1 into the other and c at what time, the moving point hits the plane.  and then we know where it is. OK, I'll have a question about this.  we don't get a solution, what happens? So, indeed, our line could have been parallel to the plane, or maybe even
contained in the plane. Well, if a line is parallel to the plane, then maybe what happens is that when we plug in the positions of a moving point, we actually get something that never equals 7, because maybe we get a constant, say that we have, I don't know, 13 all the time, well, 1 is 13 equal to 7, the answer is never.  that the line is actually parallel to the plane, you would not find a
solution to the equation that you get at the end.  So, if you're not on what time you choose, you always get 7. That's what would happen if
or 9 is in-for-plane, you would always get 7. So maybe I should find this down.  x of t, y of t, z of t, into the equation always gives, we always get, well, here, in this case, 7, or whatever, if a value of
of a value of a sub b for the plane, if the line is parallel to the plane.  in fact, we get, let's say, another constant. So in fact, when you plug these things, normally you get a quantity that's of a form, something times
t plus a constant, because that's what you plug in into the equation of a plane.  something times t plus something equals something, and that
you have a single solution. And the special case is if this coefficient of t turns out to be 0 in the end, and that's actually going to happen, exactly when the line is either parallel or in the plane.  times minus 3, it's the dot product between the
normal vector of a plane and the vector along the line. So this quotation becomes 0, exactly when the line is perpendicular to the normal vector, that means it's parallel to the plane. So everything makes sense. If you're confused about what I just said, you can ignore it.  OK, so if not, let's move on to more general
parametric equations. So I hope you've seen here that parametric equations are a great way to think about line in space. There also a great way to think about actually any kind of trajectory that can be traced maybe by a moving point.  So, marginarily, we can use parametric equations for arbitrary motions  in the plane or in space. So let's look at an example. So it's a famous curve called the cycloid, and the cycloid is something that you can actually see, sometimes at night, when people are biking, if you have something  that we've slightly slightly like the wheel. So let me explain what's the definition of a
sequence?  So I should say I've seen a lecture where actually a professor had a volunteer on a
unicycle to demonstrate how that works, but I didn't arrange for that. So instead, I will explain it to you using more conventional means. So let's say that we have a wheel that's rolling on a horizontal ground  And as it's running, of course, it's going to turn, so it's going to move forward to a new position. And now, let's imagine that we have a point that's being painted on the circumference of a wheel, and
initially that point is here. So as the wheel starts rotating, well, of course, it moves forward, and it also it turns on itself, so that point starts  behind the point of contact, because the wheel is rotating at the same time as it's moving forward. And so the cycloid is the trajectory of this moving point.  So this height here is a, rolling on a flow, which is the x-axis. And we have a point p that's painted on the wheel,  the origin, but of course, as time goes by, it
moves on the wheel. So p is a point on the rim of the wheel, and it starts at the origin. So the question is what happens?  a position of this point x of y of t, y of t, as a function of time. So here's the reason why I have this
computer. So I'm not sure if it will be very easy to visualize, but we have a wheel, well, I hope you can vaguely see that there's a circle that's moving  the wheel is green here, and as the radius that's being painted blue in it, and the radius rotates the wheel as the wheel is moving forward. So now let's try to paint the trajectory of the point.  So the cycloid, well, I guess it doesn't quite look like what I've drawn, it looks like it goes a bit higher up, which will be the trajectory of this right point.  because when the wheel has rotated by a full term, then you're basically back at the same
situation, except a bit further along the road. So we do it once more.  OK, so the question that we want to answer is what is the
position of x of t, y of t of a point p?  So actually, I'm writing x of t, y of t, that means that maybe I'm expressing the
opposition in terms of time, let's see, is time going to be a good thing to do. Well, certainly, the position changes of our time, but does it actually matter how fast the wheel is running? No, because I can just play the motion infest and infest forward, the wheel will be going faster, but the trajectory is still the same.  fact, time is not the most relevant thing here. What matters to us, more, is how far the wheel has gone, so we could use, for
either the distance by which the wheel has moved. We can do even better, because we see that the most complicated thing that happens here is the rotation, so maybe we should actually use the angle by which the wheel has  can choose, which are a 1 you prefer, but I think here, we'll get the simplest
answer if we parameterize things by the angle. So in fact, instead of t, I will be using, let's call feta, as a function of the angle,  has rotated. So how are we going to do that?  using vectors in a smart way. So let me draw a picture of a wheel after things have
rotated by a certain amount, so maybe my point p now is here, and so the wheel has rotated by this angle here, and I want to find the position of my point p. So the position of this point p, that's going to be the same as knowing the vector  to this moving point. So I haven't really simply
have a problem yet because we don't really know about vector O p, but maybe we know about simpler vectors, which sum will be O p. So let's see, let's give names to a few of our points in there.  then it looks like maybe I have actually a chance of understanding that
does maybe OA doesn't look quite so scary or a, b doesn't look too bad, bp doesn't look too bad, and if I sum them together, I will obtain OP.  So now we've greatly simplified the problem, we had to find one vector that we didn't know, now we have to find three
vectors that we don't know. But you'll see each of them is actually fairly easy to think about.  very easy. Well, the y-component is just going to be 0. It's directed along the x-axis. What about the x-component? So, Oa is the distance by which the wheel has traveled to get to its
coron position. I hear a lot of people saying R theta, let me actually say a theta, because I've called a, the radius of a wheel.  is a theta. Why is it a theta? That's because the wheel, well, there's an assumption, which is that the wheel is running on something
normal like a hold and not on maybe, you know, ice, something like that, so it's running without slipping. So that means that this distance on the hold is actually equal to the distance here on the circumference of a wheel.  proved can be measured either here or here, these are the same distances. So that makes it a theta, and maybe I should justify by saying, a
mount by which the wheel has hold, has moved, it's equal to the distance from 0 to a is equal to the  arc length on the circumference of a circle from a to p. And you know that if you have a
sector corresponding to an angle theta, then its length is a times theta, provided that, of course, you express the angle in radiance.  and vector bp.  So a, b is pretty easy, because it's pointing straight up, and its length is a, so it's just 0, a.  So vector bp, we know two things about it, we know actually it's length, so the magnitude of bp is a, and we know it makes an angle and an angle theta with the vertical.  is a closer picture, now in a picture where I'm going to
centre things at b. So I have my point p, here I have theta, this length is a, well, what are the components of bp?  thing, things about a, but I agree with a, I hear some cosine, I hear some sine, I think it's
actually the sine, yes, it's a sine theta, except it's going to the left, so actually it will have a negative a sine theta.  So now we can answer the initial question, because vector op, what we'll just add up a, a, a, b, and bp, so the x
component will be a, a, feta, minus a sine theta,  a minus a cosine theta. So, any questions about that? So, again, that's the answer, because this thing here is the x
cordinate  as a function of theta, and that one is for y
coordinate as a function of theta. So now, just to show you that we can do a lot of things when we have a parametric equation, here's a small mystery. So what happens exactly near that bottom point? What does that curve look like?  is that something of a display, or is it actually what happens? So what do you think happens when you have a bottom point?  Indeed, a corner with some angle between the two directions, does it make an angle, is it actually a small
cure without any corner, but we don't see it because it's too small to be visible on the computer's claim, does it actually make a loop, or does it actually come down and then back up without going to the left or to the right, and we thought make an angle?  majority votes for n-sub number 2 or 4, and at this point, we can't quite tell. So let's try to figure it out from
this formula, I mean, if a way to answer that for sure is to actually look at the formulas.  And they have a bottom point.  find simpler formulas for these things. So well, to simplify, maybe let's divide everything by a, let's risk a, everything by a, if you want let's say that we take the
unit of length to be the radius of R will, so instead of measuring things in f or meters, we'll just measure them in wheel radius.  have equals 1, then our formulas are slightly simpler, we get x of theta is
feta minus sine theta, and y equals 1 minus cosine. So if we want to understand what these things look like, maybe we should try to take some approximation.  a sign of a very small angle, it's close to the actual
angle itself, if theta is very small. And you know that the cosine of an angle that's very small is close to 1. Well, that's pretty good. If we use that, well, we'll get theta minus theta, 1 minus 1, looks like it's not precise enough, which just gets 0 and 0, that's not  what happens. So we need actually better
approximations than that. So hopefully you have seen, in one variable calculus, something called Taylor expansion,  OK, I see that if you have not seen Taylor expansion, or if somehow it was so traumatic that you've blocked it out of your memory, let me just remind you that Taylor expansion is a way to get a
battery approximation than just looking at the function that's  So here's an example of where it actually comes in handy in real life.  function f of t is approximately equal to, well, our first guess, of course, would be f of 0, that's the first
approximation. If we want to be a bit more precise, we know that when we change by t, well, t times the derivative comes in, that's the linear approximation to how the function changes. Now, if we want to be even more precise, then there's an over term, which is t squared over 2 times the second  derivative, and if you want to be even more precise, you'll have t cube over
6 times the third derivative at 0, and you can continue and so on, but we want need more. So if you use this here, it tells you that sine of a small angle theta, well, it looks like theta, but if we want to be more precise,  minus theta cubed over 6, and cosine of theta, well, it's not quite 1, it's close to 1 minus
feta square over 2. So these are slightly better approximations of sine and cosine for small angles. So now, if we try to figure out, again, what happens to our x of theta,  well, that will be, sorry, feta minus, feta minus, feta
cube over 6, that's, feta cube over 6, and y, on the other hand, is going to be 1 minus that, that's about d that squared over 2.  y is much larger, if you take the cube of a very small number, it becomes
very, very, very, very small. So in fact, we can look at that, let me say, x in absolute value is much smaller than y. And in fact, what we can do is we can look at the ratio between y and x, that tells us the slope with which we approach the origin.  that gives us free, divided by theta, that tends to infinity when theta approaches 0. So that means that the slope of our curve near the origin is
actually infinite.  So the correct picture is really something like this. So the instantaneous motion, if you had to describe what happens very, very close to the
orgin, is that your point is actually not moving to the left or to the right, along with the wheel, it's moving down and then up. And at the same time, it is actually moving a little bit forward at the same time, but the dominant motion near the origin is really that it goes down and then up, so on number 4, you have a vertical tangent.  OK, I think I'm at the end of time, so have a nice weekend, and I'll see you on Tuesday. So on Tuesday, I will have practice exams for next week's test.