 The following content is provided under a Creative Commons Commons license, your support will help MIT open courseware continue to offer high-quality educational resources for free to make a donation or to view
additional materials from hundreds of MIT courses, visit MIT open courseware at ocw.mit.edu.  As a way of describing the motion of a point that moves in the plane or in space, as a function of time, or your favorite
parameter that will tell you how far the motion has progressed, and I think we did in detail, the example of a cycloid, which is the curve traced by a point  on a wheel that's rolling on a flat surface. So we had this example where we have this wheel that's rolling on the x-axis, and we have this point on the wheel, and as it moves around, it traces a trajectory that  more or less like this. So I'm trying a new
color, is this visible from the back, so no more blue. So remember, in general, we are trying to find the position, so x of t, y of t, maybe z of t, if  of a moving point, a long trajectory, and one way to think about this is in terms of the
position vector, so the position vector is just the vector  whose components are the coordinates of a point. So if you prefer, that's the same thing as the vector from the
orgin to the moving point. So maybe our point is here p. So this vector here, this vector here,  is vector op, and that's also the
position vector of d. So just to give you, again, that example, if I take the cycloid  a wheel of radius 1, and let's say that we are going at unit speed, so that the angle that we used as a parameter less time is the same thing as time.  because 1 minus cosine t, 1 minus cosine t. That's a formula that you should have in your notes from last time, except we had f of
t instead of t because we were using the angle, but now I'm saying we're moving at unit speed, so time and angle of the same thing.  detail. So now that we know the position of a point, as a function of time, we can try to study how it varies, and the
particular things like the speed and the acceleration. So let's start with speed. Well, in fact, we can do better than speed, let's not start with speed. So speed is a number. It tells you how fast you're going an on-get trajectory, if you're driving in a car, then it tells you how fast  of going, but unless you have one of these fancy curves with a GPS, it doesn't tell you in which
direction you're going, and that's useful information, too, if your time to figure out what your trajectory is. So, in fact, there's two respects to it. One is how fast you're going, and the advantage in what direction you're going, that means, actually, we should use a vector, maybe to think about this.  And the way we can get it, so it's called, usually,
v, so V here stands for velocity, more than for vector, and you just get it by taking the derivative of a position vector with respect to time. Now, it's our first time writing this kind of thing with a vector. So the basic rule is you can take the derivative of a vector quantity just by taking the derivatives of each component,  the x dT, dy dT, and if you have the component, dZ dT.  So let's see what it is for the first side-closed. So in the example of a side-closed, well, so what do we get when we take the
d derivative of this formula out there?  minus cosine t, the derivative of 1 is 0, the
dereotype of minus cosine
coseinty is sine t, very good. That's at least one thing you should remember from single variable calculus, hopefully you remember even more than that.  we are going in in what direction. So, for example, observe, remember, last time at the end of class, we were trying to
figure out what exactly happens near the bottom point when we have this mose and that seems to stop and go backwards. And we answered that one way, but let's try to understand it in terms of velocity.  is 0. So at that time, at that particular time, our point is actually not moving. Of course, it's being moving just before, and it starts moving just after, and it's just, you know, the
instant, at that particular instant, the speed is 0. So that's a slightly maybe counter-intuitive thing, that something is moving, at that time, it's actually  Now, let's see, so that's a vector, and it's useful, but if you want just the usual
speed as a number, then what will you do? Well, you will just take exactly the magnitude of this vector. So speed, which is the scalar quantity, is going to be just the magnitude of a vector  So in this case, well, it would be square root of 1 minus cosine
t squared plus sine squared plus sine squared t, and if you expand that, well, so you will get, let me take a bit more space, that's going to be square root of 1 minus 2 cosine  plus cosine square t plus sine square t seems to simplify a little bit, because we have cosine
square plus sine square, that's 1. So it's going to be square root of 2 minus 2 cosine t. So at this point, if I was going to ask you, when is the speed the smallest or the largest, you could answer, based on that, c at t equals 0,  that turns out to be 0, the point is not moving at t equals pi, that ends up being square root of 2 plus 2, which is 4, so that's 2, and that's when you're at the top of the
out, and that's when the point is moving the fastest. In fact, there, it's moving twice as fast as the wheel, because the wheel is moving to the right at your end of the speed, and the point is also rotating, so it's moving to the right at your end of the speed relative to the center, so that the two  Anyway, that's the formula we can get. Now, what about acceleration?  when you drive a car, and the one that will be using. So if you might think acceleration is just the derivative of speed, if my car goes 50, 55 miles an hour on the highway, then it's going at constant speed, it's not accelerating. But let's say that I'm taking a really tight turn, then I'm going to feel something, there's some force being exerted, and in fact, there is a side-way acceleration at that point, even for the
speed is not changing.  the definition we'll take of acceleration is as a vector, and the
acceleration vector is just the derivative of a velocity vector. So even if a speed is constant, that means even if a length of a velocity vector, the velocity vector  that produces acceleration. And so this is the notion of acceleration that's relevant in physics, for example, when you write f equals M a, that's really what a, that's the a that you have in mind here, it's a vector. Of course, if you're moving in a straight line, then the two notion of the same, acceleration is also going to be a long-term line, and is going to have to do with the
d derivative of speed, that in general, that's not quite the same.  So, for example, let's look at the cycloid. If we take the example of a cycloid, what's the
derevative of 1 minus cosine t? It's sine t, and what's the derivative of sine t? Causine t. So the acceleration vector is sine t cosine  So in particular, let's look at what happens at time
t equal 0 when the point is not moving. Well, the acceleration vector there will be 0, 1. So what that means is that if I look at my trajectory  at this point, well, then the acceleration vector is
pointing in that direction, it's the unit vector in the vertical direction. So my point is not moving at that particular time, but it's accelerating up, so that means, actually, that as it comes down, first it's slowing down, then it stops here, and then it reverses going back up.  saying less time that the trajectory at that point has a vertical
tension, because that's the direction in which, for m-off and is going to occur just before and just after times 0.  So I should insist maybe on one thing, which is that we can differentiate vectors just component by component. And we can differentiate vector expressions according to certain rules that we'll see in a moment, one thing that we cannot do, it's not  the length of the R dt, which is the speed, is equal to d,
length R dt, this is completely false, and they're really not the same. So if you have to differentiate the length of a vector, then basically, you're in trouble. If you really, really, really want to do it, well, the length of a vector is the square root of the sum of the squares  and from that you can use formula for the derivative of the square root and the chain
roll and various other things, and you can get there, but it will not be a very nice expression. There's no simple formula for this kind of thing. Fortunately, we almost never have to compute this kind of thing, because after all, it's not a very relevant quantity, what's more relevant, maybe this one, this is actually the speed.  So let's continue our exploration. So the next concept that I want to define is that of R-clength. So R-clength is just the distance that you have traveled along the curve.  by you've gone, how much fuel you have used if it's a fence of n's a care, and what it does is it
actually, it integrates the speed over time to give you the arc length along the trajectory of a care. So the usual notation that we'll have is S for arc length. I'm not quite sure how you get an S out of this, but it's the usual notation.  traveled along the trajectory, and for that to make sense, of course, we need to fix a reference point. Maybe on the side
clarity, which say it's a distance starting from the origin, or in general, maybe you'll say you start at time equals 0, but it's a convention,  new in advance, you could have actually your car's mileage counter to
count backwards from the point where the car will die and stop working. That would be slightly freaky, but you could have a negative arc length that gets closer and closer to 0 and gets to 0 at the end of a trajectory or anything you want.  to the things we've seen there, so in particular, how do you relate R-clanx and time? So there's a simple relation, which is that the rate of change of R-clanx, there's a time, well, that's going to be the
p that which are moving.  because of a speed, as a scalar quantity, that is how much distance you're
covering the unit time, and in fact, to be completely honest, I should put an absolute value here, because there's examples of curves, maybe where your motion is going back and forth around the same curve, and then you don't want to keep  all of the time, actually maybe you want to say that the arc length
increases when the cases and on the curve, and you get to choose how you count it, but in this case, if you're moving back and forth, it would make more sense to have the arc length first  So if you want to know really what the arc length is, then basically, the only way to do it is
to integrate speed, that's a time. So if you wanted to know how long an arch of cycloid is, you have this nice looking curve, how long is it? Well, you'd have to basically integrate this quantity from t equals 0 to 2 pi.  And to say if I don't really know how to integrate that.  We don't actually have a formula for the length at this point. However, we'll see one
later using a cool trick and multivariable calculus. So for now, we'll just leave a formula like that, and we don't know how long it is.  Now, another useful notion is the unit tangent vector to the trajectory. So the usual notation is a t-hat, it has a hat, because it's a
unit vector, and t equals its tangent.  how do we get this unit tangent vector? So maybe I should have pointed out before that if you're moving along
some trajectory, so you're going in that direction, then when you're at this point, the velocity vector is going to be tangent to the trajectory, it tells you the direction of motion in particular.  deal it so that its length becomes 1. So it's b, divided by
bonditude of b.  Seems like now we have a lot of different things that should be
related in some way, so let's see what we can say. Well, we can say that dR by dT, so that's for velocity vector, that's the same thing as if I use the chain rule, dR dS times dS dS dT.  So let's think about these things. So this guy here, we've just seen that's the same as the speed. So this one here should be, b, divided by its length, so that means this
actually should be the unit tangent vector.  So let me rewrite that, it's t, ds dt. So maybe if I actually stated
direction at way, I'm just saying the velocity vector has a length and the direction.  So the p is the SDT, and the tension vector is T-hat, and that's how we get this.  So let's try just to see just to see why dRdS should be t. Well, let's think of dRdS. dRdS means, you know, position vector R, means you have the origin, which is
somewhere out there, and the vector R is here. So dRdS means we move by a small amount delta S along the trajectory, by a certain distance delta S, and we look at how the position  will have a small change, let me call that vector delta R, corresponding to the
size corresponding to the length delta S. And now, delta R should be essentially roughly equal to, well, its direction will be tangent to the trajectory.  then the motion will be almost tangent to a
projectory times the length of it will be delta S for distance that I have traveled.  So we have R at time t, we have R at time t plus delta t. This vector here I will call delta R, the length of this vector is delta S. And the direction is essentially that of a tangent vector.  So delta S over delta t, that's the distance
traveled divided by the time that's going to be close to the speed, and delta R is approximately t times delta S. So now if I divide both sides  I get this, and if I take the limit as delta t tends to 0, then I get the same formula with derivatives
and with an equality into the approximation, the approximation becomes better and better if I go to smaller intervals.  OK, I'll have any questions about this.  be more careful, actually. So you're asking about whether of a delta R is actually strictly
strickenly tangent to the curve, is that?  the this arc inside the curve, while the attention vector will be going in this direction. So they're not strictly parallel to each other, and that's why it's only
approximately equal. Similarly, this distance, the length of delta R is not exactly the length along the curve, it's actually a bit shorter.  unnegligible, if you zoom into the care of sufficiently, then it looks more and more like a straight line, and what I say it
becomes true in the limit, any of our questions?  So let me show you a nice example of why we might want to use vectors to study
parametric curves, because after all, a lot of what's here you can just do in coordinates, and we don't really need vectors.  about Kepler's second low of celestial mechanics. So that goes back from, that goes back to 16 or 9, so that's not exactly
recent news, but still, I think it's a very interesting example of why you might want to use vector methods to analyze motions  So what happens, what happens back then, is Kepler was trying to observe the notion of
planets in the sky and trying to come up with general explanations of how they move before them, people were saying, well, they kind of move in a circle, but maybe it's more complicated than that, we need to add smaller circular motions on top of each other and so on.  around the sun, and that they move in a very specific way around that, so that's actually free-laws, but let me just tell you
about the second one, that has a very nice vector interpretation. So what Kepler 2, now says is that the motion of planets is, first of all, they move in a plane,  account the area swept out by the line from the sun to the planet is swept at constant time.  is swept out by the line at a constant rate. So that's an interesting law because it tells you, once you know what the orbit of a planet looks like, it tells you how fast it's going to move on  at orbit.  So let me explain again. So this law says maybe of a sun, let's put the sun here at the origin, and let's have a planet, well, the planet  around the sun in some trajectory, so this is supposed to be a light blue, can you say it as
different from white? No, OK, I mean, you will. OK, it doesn't really matter. So the planet moves on its orbit, and if you wait for a certain time,  then a bit later it will be here, then here and so on, then you can look at the
amount of the area inside this triangular wedge, and the claim is that the amount of area in here is proportional to the time it lapsed. So in particular, if a planet is closer to the sun, then it has to go faster, and if it's further away from the sun, then it has to go slower so that the area remains proportional to time.  and prediction. And I think the way he came to it was really just by using a lot of
absolute of observations and trying to measure what was true, it wasn't true. But let's try to see how we can understand that in terms of what we know today about mechanics.  19th century instead of beginning of a 17th century. So he was able to explain this, using his
lows for gravitational attraction.  And you'll see that if we reformulate capital L0 in terms of vectors, then if we work up it with these vectors, we're going to end up with something that's actually in
completely obvious to us now at the time it was very far from obvious, but to us now it's completely obvious.  So let's think of what kinds of vectors we might want to have in here.  think of maybe the position vector, and maybe it's variation. So if we wait as an
emount of time, we'll have a vector delta R, which is the change in position vector of a certain interval of time.  that what's the most complicated thing in here, it's this RRIR is swept out by the line. How do we express that RRIR in terms of vectors? Well, I've almost
given the answer by drawing this picture, if I take a sufficiently small amount of time, this grid region looks like a triangle.  is approximately equal to 1 1 1 half of the area of a parallelogram that I could form from these vectors. And the
area of a parallelogram is given by the magnitude of a cross product. So I should say this is the area swept in time delta T. And you should think of delta
times as relatively small.  I mean, at the scale of a planet, that might still be a few days, but small compare to the overall trajectory. So now, let's remember that the amount that we removed delta R is
approximately equal to V times delta T, and just using the definition of a velocity vector  So let's use that, so it's again, approximately equal to R
cross v, magnitude times delta t. I can take out for delta t, which is a scalar. So now, what does it mean to say that Rier is swept at a constant rate?  So that means, so the last says, in fact, that the length of this cross product, R
crossy equals constant, R crossy has constant length.  Now, yes, let me try to explain that again. So what I'm claiming is that the length of the cross-product, R cross-V, measures the rate at which RR is swept by the
position vector, I should say, with a factor of 1 1, 1 half of this length, is the rate at which RR is swept.  t, our planet moves by a delta t. So if it moves by a
v delta t, it means that this triangle up there has two sides, one is the position vector R, the other one is a delta t. So it's RR is given by 1 1 1 half of the magnitude of a cross product, that's the formula we've seen for the RR of a triangle in space.  magnitude of a cross product. So to say that the rate at which RRIswept is constant means that these two are
propertyional, RRI are divided by delta T is constant over time, and so this is constant. Now, what about the other half of the law? Well, it says that the motion is not plain,  And so we have a plane in which the mothin takes place, and it contains also the
sum, and it contains the trajectory. So let's think about that plane. Well, I claim that the position vector is in the plane. That's what we are saying, but there's another vector that I know is in the plane, what you could say, the position vector  at another time, or at any time. But in fact, what's also true is that the
velocity vector is in the plane. If I'm moving in a plane, then position and velocity are in there, so the plane of motion contains R and V. So what's the direction of the cross-property  that are positive. Well, it's the direction that's perpendicular to this plane, so it's
normal to the plane of motion. And that means, now that, actually, we've put the two statements in there into a single form, because we're saying  because we have constant length and constant direction. In fact, in general, maybe I should say something about this. So if you just look at the
position vector and the velocity vector for any motion at any given time, then together, the determine some plane. And that's the plane that contains the origin, the point, and the velocity vector. If you want it's the plane in which the motion seems to be going at the given time.  is not in a plane, then that plane will change, it's somehow the
instands of a plane in which the motion is taking place at the given time. And to say that the motion at should be stays in that plane, for however, means that this guy will not change direction.  So k plus 2 and l is actually equivalent to saying that R equals constant, equals a constant vector.  in terms of derivatives, it means d by dt of n
crossy is the 0 vector. Now, so there's an interesting thing to know, which is that we can use the usual product hold for derivatives with vector expressions, with the product of your cross product.  is that when we differentiate a cross product, we have to be careful that the guy on the left, the guy on the left, the guy on the right,
the guy on the right, the guy on the right, the guy on the right, so if you know u, v prime equals u prime, plus u prime, plus u, u, v prime, then you're safe. If you know it as u prime, plus
up, plus v prime, you then you're not safe. So it's the only thing to watch for.  for taking the derivative of a dot product, value don't actually even need to be
very careful about all the other things, or the derivative of a cross product, value just need to be a little bit more careful.  plus b plus R plus R plus db ddt, well, let's reformulate things slightly. So dR dt already has a name, in fact, that's b, that's what we call the velocity vector. So this is b plus b plus R plus R plus what is db ddt?  equals 0. So now, what's the next step? Well, we know what v
crosses v is, because remember, a vector of cross-hid set is always 0.  0, and that's the same as saying that the cross product of two vectors is 0, exactly when the
parallelogram that the form has no area, and the way in which that happens is if they're actually parallel to each other. So that means the acceleration is parallel to the position.  to the position vector. And since we know that acceleration is caused by a force, that's equivalent to the fact that the
gravitational force is parallel to the position vector, that means if you have the sun here at the origin, and if you have your planet, well, the gravitational first  along this line. In fact, the load of the statement say, we have a
that's going towards the sun or away from the sun, what we know now is that, of course, the attraction is towards the sun, but Kepler's law would also be true, if things were going away, so in particular, say, electric force also has this property of being towards the central charge, so if you look at motion of charged particles in an electric field,  OK, that's the end for today, thanks.