 The following content is provided under a Creative Commons license, your support will help MIT open courseware continue to offer high-quality
educational resources for free to make a donation or to view additional materials from hundreds of MIT courses, visit MIT open courseware at ocw.mit.edu.  this is simple, it's everything, OK? So I mean, I think we've seen in class so far, is on the exam. But let me just remind you of the main topics that we've seen. So first of all, we learned about vectors, how to use them, and dot product  So at this point, you should probably know that the dot product of two vectors is obtained by summing
products of components, and geometrically, it's the length of a times the length of b times the cosine of the angle between them.  And in particular, we can use that product to measure angles by solving for cosine
feta in this equality and most importantly, to detect whether two vectors are perpendicular to each other.  questions about that. Is everyone reasonably happy with the product by now?  that on practice 1a, a good example of a typical problem with that product would be problem 1. And let's see, we are going to go over a practice example when I'm done writing this list of topics, I think probably we actually will skip this problem, because I think most of you know how to do it. And if not, then you should run for help from your
resolution and instructor to figure out how to do it.  So the second topic that we saw was cross product. So when you have 2,000,000 space, you can just form a cross product by computing is determinant. So implicitly, we should also know about the
terminence.  By what I mean 2 by 2 and free by free, don't hover, within on larger ones, even if you're
interested, there won't be on the test. And the applications of cross product, so for example, finding the area of a triangle, or a parallel  So if you have a triangle in space with side a and b, then it's R is 1 1 1 1 of the
length of a equals b, because the length of a equals b, well, is length a, length b sine theta, which is the same as the R-riarial of a parallelogram formed by these two vectors. And the other application of cross product is to find a vector  that's perpendicular to two given vectors, so in particular, to find the
vector that's normal to a plane and then find the equation of a plane. So another application is finding the normal vector to a plane, and using that  finding the equation of a plane. So basically, remember, to find the
equation of a plane, ax plus b, y plus cz equals d, what you need is the normal vector to the plane, and the components of a normal vector,  that go into this, and we've seen an argument for why that happens to be the case. So to find a normal
vector to a plane, typically what we'll do is we'll take two vectors that lie in the plane and we'll take the cross product, and the cross product will automatically be perpendicular to both of them.  when we look at problem 5, on practice 1a, I think we'll try to do that one. So another application, let me just mention it as a topic that goes along with this one. So we've seen also about
equations of lines and how to find  where a line intersects a plane. So just to refresh your memories, the equation of a line, well, we'll be looking at
parameteric equations to know the parenting equation of a line, we need to know a point on the line, and we need to know a vector that's parallel to the line.  And if we know a point on the line and the vector along the line, then we can express the
parademic equations for the motion of a point that's moving on the line, moving, actually starting at this point, at time 0, and moving with velocity,  So to put things in symbolic form, you'll get a position of that point by starting with a position at time 0 and adding t times for vector v, so that gives you x, y, and z in terms of t.  OK, so we'll look at problem 5 in a bit, but any general
questions about these topics. Do you have a question? Do we have to not tell our series? That's a good question.  So Taylor series are something you should be aware of, generally speaking, it will be useful for you in real life, at least if you do not want to go to the supermarket, but if you solve engineering problems, you will need Taylor series. So it would be good not to
forget them entirely, but on the 18 or 2 exams, they probably won't be there.  let me continue with more topics, and then we can see if you can think of other
tapx that should or should not be on the exam. So third topic would be matrices, linear systems,  So I know that most of you have calculators that can invert matrices, but still you're expected at this point to know how to do it by hand. If you've looked at the practice test, both of them have a problem that ask you to invert a matrix, so at least do part of it. And so it's very likely that tomorrow there will be a problem like that as well.  So on the actual exam, unfortunately, not with the same matrix, so you can't
be on the answer by heart. So another thing that we have learned about, well, matrices, so I should say this is going to be a problem free on the test, and we'll  I think, actually, but anyway, so we'll come back to it later, but a couple of things that you should remember, so if you have a
system of the form ax equals b, then there's two cases, if a determinant of a is not 0, then that means you can compute the inverse matrix, and you can just solve by taking a inverse times b. And the other case is when the determinant  of a is 0, and then there's either no solution, or there's
infinity and many solutions. And in particular, if you know that there's a solution, for example, if b is 0, there's always an obvious solution, x equals 0, then you will actually have infinitely  I really know how to tell whether it's no
no solution or infinitely many. Questions about that?  that you might still want to remember how to rotate a vector in the plane by 90 degrees, because that's useful when we've done
problems about parametric equations, which is what I'm coming to next. So what we've seen about rotation matrices, that was a homework part B problem, you're not supposed to remember by heart everything that was in part B of a homework.  no, I want to ask you by how to know what is the
formula for rotation matrix, and then we come to last, but not least, the problem of finding parametric equations,  And in particular, possibly by the composition of the composition
vector, possibly by the composition of the composition vector into a sum of simpler vectors, so you've seen quite an equal example of that on the last
problem set with this picture of that, maybe by now, you've had some nightmares about.  well, whatever. I mean, you should know, basically, how to analyze a function that's being described to you and
express it in terms of vectors and then figure out what the bounded k-quake wave and will be. Now, again, it won't be as complicated on the exam as the one on the problem set, but there's a couple of those on the practice exam, and that gives you an idea of what's realistically expected  And now, once we have parametric equations for motion, so that means when we know how to find the
position vector as a function of a parameter maybe of time, then we've seen also about velocity and acceleration, which are the vectors obtained by taking the first and second derivatives  And so one topic that I will add in there as well is somehow how to prove things about motions by differentiating vectors, identities.  We looked at Kepler's second law of planetary motion, and we reduced it to a
calculation about the derivative of the cross-product R cross B. So now, on the exam, you don't need to know the details of Kepler's law, but you need to be able to manipulate the point it is a bit in the way that we did.  and 6, all about parametric motions, probably too moreover, will not be free, this thing
problems about parametric motions, but maybe a couple of them. So I think that's basically the list of topics. Anybody spot something that I've forgotten to put in the exam or questions about, something that should or should not be  Yeah, yeah, yeah. How about parametriving weird trigonometric functions? I'm not sure what you mean by that.  And when we've seen these problems about rotating wheels, say, the cycler, for example, and so on, and
there's a bit of cosine and sine and so on, I think not much more than that you won't need obscure
triangle-to-get-emeterated identities.  to look at practice 1a, the last problem does have a little bit of proof, 6b says, show that, blah, blah, blah, blah, but as you will see, it's not a
difficult kind of proof.  Well, we should know, definitely, a lot about the
equations of planes and lines, and you should probably know that a sphere center that the origin is the set of points where distance to the center is equal to the radius of a sphere. We don't need more at this point. As the semester goes on, we'll start seeing cones and things like that, but at this point, planes, lines, and maybe you need to know about circles and spheres, but nothing beyond that.  more questions? Yes? So if there's a formula that you have proved in the homework, then yes, you can assume it on the test, maybe you want to write on your test that this is a formula you've seen in homework, just so that you remember it from homework and not looking at your
nabous shoulder or whatever.  So generally speaking, for the way that, for the, for example, there's a, probably there will be a linear
system to solve, it will say on the example, you're supposed to solve that using matrices, not by elimination. So things like that, if a problem says, you're solved by using vector methods, things like that, then try to use at least a vector somewhere, but in general, you're allowed to use things that you know.  the intermediate equations to xy, we need to go from
parameteric equations to xy equations. Well, let's say only if it's very easy. If I give you a counter-stricken curve, sine t, comma, sine t, when you should be able to observe that it's on the line y equals x, not beyond that.  do we have to use, sorry, yes, I don't know if you will have to use it, but certainly you should know a little bit about the
unit tension vector, so just remember, the main thing to know is that the unit tension vector is velocity divided by the speed.  Yes?  that I would say, so basically you don't need to know cluster up, you need to know the kind of stuff that we saw when we derived it, such as how to take the
derevative of a dot product or a cross product, that's basically the answer.  How to calculate the distance between two lines and distance between two planes, well, you've seen, probably, recently, that it's
quite painful to do in general, and no, I don't think that will be on the exam by itself.  over more, you know about things, the better, but things that come up on these of the problem sets are
interesting things, but they're usually not needed in the exams. If you have more questions, then you're not raising your hand high enough for me to see it.  hopefully, everybody has it, if you don't have it, hopefully your neighbor has it, if you don't have it, and your neighbor
doesn't have it, then please raise your hands, I have a couple of,  So, you might be able to need it over there.  that follow and them for now, but I think there's a few people behind you. And stop handing them out now if you really need one, it's on the website, it will be here at the end of class.  how to do them, if, I don't know, let's see, how many of you have no problem with
problem 1? How many of you have trouble with problem 1?  because that's probably more efficient that way. So I'm going to start right away with
problem-free, actually. So problem-free says we have a matrix given to us, 1, 3, 2, 2, 0 minus 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 0, and it tells us the determinant of a is 2, and a inverse  course something, but we are missing two values a and b, and we're
suppose to find them. So that means we need to do the steps of the algorithm to find the inverse of a.  minus 1, minus 2, 5, 2, 2, 2, 2, minus 6, and here, there's two unknown values. So remember, to invert the matrix, first we compute the minus, then we flip some
science to get the co-factors, then we transpose, and find that we divide by the determinant. So let's try to be smart about this. Do we need to compute all 9 minus?  So which miners do we need to compute? Here and here, or here and here. Yeah, that looks better because remember, we're going to transpose things, so these two guys will end up here. So I claim we should compute these two miners. And we'll see if that's good enough. If you start doing others and you find that they don't end up in the right place, then just do more. But you don't need to spend your time computing all nine of them.  If you're wide about not doing it right, then of course, you can maybe compute 1 or 2 more to the
deletech of your answers, but let's just do those that we think are needed.  so should be minus 2. Then the 1 for the lower left
corner, we delete the last and the first column, we're left with 3, 2, 0, minus 1, 3 times minus 1 is negative 3, minus 0, we're still left with negative 3.  be up for everyone, good. Then we need to go to co-factors, that means we need to change
signs. So the whole is, we change signs in, basically, these four places, so that means we'll be left with positive 2, and negative 3,  then we take the transpose, that means, well, these two, so the first column will copy into the first row, so this guy we still don't know, but here we'll have 2, and here we'll have minus 3.  by the determinant of a, and here, well, we are actually told that the
determining of a is 2, so we'll divide by 2, but there's already 1 1 have here, so it's done for us. So the values that we'll put up there are going to be 2 and negative 3.  Now, let's see how we use that to solve a linear
system. So if we have to solve a linear system, ax equals b, so then, well, the matrix is invertible, the term that is not 0, so we can certainly write x equals a in the sub b, so we have to multiply,  1, 2, negative 3, minus 1, minus 2, 5, 2, 2, 2, minus 6 times b is 1, negative 2, 1. So remember to do a matrix multiplication, you take the rows and here, the columns in here, and you do dot product.  negative 6, except they still have, of course, a 1 1 1 1 infront, then minus 1 plus 4 plus 5 should be 8, 2 minus 4 minus 6 should be negative 8. So that will simplify to minus 3, 4 minus 4.  OK, so now we come to part c, which is the harder part of this
problem, so it says let's take this matrix a, and let's replace the 2 in the upper-right corner by some other number c, so that means we'll look at 1, 3c, 2, 0, minus 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 0.  And let's call that M, and first ask you to find the value of c for which this matrix is not
invertebral. So M is not invertible, exactly when the determinant of M is 0.  Well, we should do 1 times that small of the
terminant, which is 0 minus negative 1 is 1 times 1 minus 3 times that determinant, which is 0 plus 1 is 1. And then we have plus c times for lower left determinant, which is 2 times 1 minus 0 is 2.  so that gives us 1 minus 2 plus 2c, so I 1 minus 3 is negative 2, plus 2c, that's 0, 1 c equals 1. So for c equals 1, this matrix is not invertible for other
values, it is invertible.  x equals 0. So I'm going to put that value 1 in there. So now, if we look at m x equals 0, well, this has either no solution or
infinity and limity-minus-solute ones, but here, there's an obvious solution, namely x equals 0 is a solution,  maybe let me rewrite it more geometrically, that's x plus 3y plus
z equals 0, 2x minus z equals 0, and x plus y equals 0. So you see, we have an obvious solution, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, but we have more solutions, how do we find more solutions?  if it's in all free of these planes, that's a way to think about it. So, probably, we're actually in this situation, where, in fact, we have free planes, that are all passing for the origin and all parallel to a same line, and so that would be the
the line of solutions.  think of this as follows. So the first observation is that actually in this situation, we don't need all free
equations, the fact that the system has, in fact, many solutions means that actually one of the equations is redundant. So if you look at it for long enough, you see, for example, if you multiply free times this equation and you subtracted that one, then you will get the first equation, free times x plus 1,  minus 2x minus g will be x plus 3y plus g. Now, we don't actually need to see that to solve a problem. I'm just showing you what happens when you have a matrix with
determine at 0, one of the equations somehow is a duplicate of the others. We don't actually need to figure out how exactly.  So the solution we can observe that the first
equation says, actually, that x, y, z, dot product with 1, 3, 1 equals 0. And the second equation says x, y, z, dot product with 2, 0, negative 1, is 0.  if we really want to keep it, we should be also having this. Now, these equations, if we can like this, they're just saying we want an x, y, z that's perpendicular to these vectors. So let's forget this one, and let's just look at these two, they're saying we want a vector that's perpendicular to these two
two-given vectors, how do we find that?  So to find x, y, z perpendicular to 1, 1, 3, 1, and 2, 0, 1, 2, 0, negative 1, we take that cross product. And that will give us something, well, let me just give you the answer.  So I don't have the answer here, so I guess I have to do it. 1, 3, 1, 2, 0, negative 1, that should be negative 3, minus 1, 2,
probably positive 3, and then negative 6. So that's a solution, and any multiple of that is a solution.  if you like, you know, neatly simplify the answer, as you could say,
negative 1, 1, 1, 1, negative 2, if you like larger numbers, you could multiply that by a million, that's also a solution.  that the same solution, well, up to a multiple, could be that if you do the cross product of these two
 guys, you actually get something that a multiple, actually, I think if you do the cross product of first and third one, you will get actually minus 1, 1 minus 2, the smaller one, but it doesn't matter, it's really in the same direction.  I don't think so because c, so an important thing to remember about cross product is we compute the minus, but then we put a minus sign on the
second component, so the coefficient of j in here, the second component, you do 1 times minus 1, minus 2 times 1, that's negative free, indeed, but then you actually change that to a positive free.  So, do we have to do we have to, do we have to, well, we don't have
parametric equations here, so solving by elimination, well, if it says that you have to use vector methods, then you  says you should use vectors and matrices, then you're expected to do it that way.  So it would be maybe minus free, free, free, free,
t, minus 60, all the multiples of that vector. We do, because 0, 0, 0, 0 is an obvious solution here. So maybe I should, alpha, I'd write, if I don't have a board, you had another question.  So we explained first how we get all the solutions and how I did that
close product.  So first of all, why did I take that cross product again? So I do that cross product because I looked at my free equations, and I observed that my free
equations can be reformulated in terms of these dot products, saying that x, y, g is actually perpendicular to these guys, and these guys are the normal vectors  in all free planes, it needs to be perpendicular to the
non-moled vectors. So that's how we got here, and now if we want something that's perpendicular to a bunch of given vectors, well, to be perpendicular to two vectors, an easy way to find one is to take the cross product. And if you take any 2 of them, you will get something that's the same up to scaling. So now, what it means, geometrically, is that what we have our free planes  And they're all, by the all actually contain a same line, and we know that's actually already the case, because they all pass for the origin, if you pass for the origin, because the constant terms are just 0. So what happens is that the normal vectors to this planes, in fact, all perpendicular to that line,  vectors, actually, all say this line is vertical, the normal vectors are all
going to be horizontal. Well, it's kind of hard to hold. And so by taking the cross product between two of the normal vectors, we found this direction.  So what we know so far is that we have this direction, minus 3, 3, 3, minus 6, that is going to be parallel to the
lang of intersections, so let me draw it here, for example, in a 3, 3, 3, minus 6.  0, 0, 0, 0, 0, actually we have found another 1, 2, which is minus 3, 3, 3, minus 6. But anyway, so now, the line of
solution has parametric equation x equals minus 3t, y equals 3t, g equals negative 6t.  for anything proportional to that. So that's how we would find all the solutions if we wanted them.  a reasonably straightforward parametric
equation is a problem, you just have to find the coordinates of that point p, and for that it's very simple. Problem 5, find the array of a space triangle, sounds like a cross product, find the equation of a plane also sounds like a cross product, and find the intersection of this plane with a line, means we find first the parity
equation of a line, and then we plug that into the
equation of a plane to get where the intersect.  OK, does that sound reasonable? OK, whose this pair it's about
problem 5? OK, let me repeat problem 5. So first part, we have to find the area of a triangle, and the way to do that is to just do 1 1 1 1 1 half of the length of a cross product  p0, p1 and p0, p2, and if we take that cross product and take the length of that and divide by 2, that will give us the
array of a triangle. So here, it turns out that this guy is 1, 1, 1, 2, if I look at the solutions, so you will end up with square root of 6 over 2.  the second one is that thing you're for the
equation of a plane, well, containing these three points. Well, first of all, we know that the normal vector to the plane is going to be given by this cross product again.  that means that the equation of a plane will be over form x plus y plus 2z equals something. Just the coefficients here come from the
normal vector and to find what goes on the right-hand side, we just plug in any of the points.  then 2 plus 1 seems like it's free, and if you want to double check your
answer, you can take p1 and p2 and check that you also get free. So a good way to check your answer.  minus 1, 0, 0, 0, that means you can find that it's
parametric equation, so x will be starts at minus 1, increasing at 0, y starts at 0, increasing at 1, and x starts at 1, x starts at 0, increasing at 1, x starts at 0, increasing at 1, you plug these into the plane equation, and that will tell you where they intersect.  I have one minute. Let me just say very quickly, well, do you want to hear about
problem 6 in your way very quickly? Yeah, OK. So problem 6, it's one of these like vector calculations. So it says we have a position vector R, and it asks you, how do we find the derivative of R  Well, remember, remember, we have a product hold for taking the
dereverative, uv prime is, u prime, v plus, uv prime also applies for dot product, so that dRdT, dot R plus R, dot dRdT, and these are both the same thing, so you get 2R, dot dRdT, but dRdT is, that's a velocity vector, hopefully you've seen things like that.  And say, show that if R has constant length, then R on the upper
perpendicular, so all you need to write, basically, is we assume R is constant. That's what it says R has constant length. Well, how do we get to say something we probably want to reduce to that?  And so that means d by dt of r that R is 0, that's what it means to be constant. And so that means R that V is 0, that means R is perpendicular to d.  time says, let's continue to assume that R has constant length, and let's try to find R dot a. So if there's acceleration, then probably we should
be in somewhere, maybe by taking a derivative of something. So if we know that R dot b equals 0, let's take the derivative of that, that's still 0, but now using the product  dR dT is v, dot v plus R dot dV dT is going to be 0. So that means that you're asked about R dot a, well, that's equal to minus
v, dot v, and that's it.