 The following content is provided under a Creative Commons Commons license, your support will help MIT open courseware continue to offer high-quality educational resources for free to make a donation or to view
additional materials from hundreds of MIT courses, visit MIT open courseware at ocw.mit.edu.  But calculus really is about studying functions. So now we are going to actually move on to
studying functions of several variables. So this new unit that what we'll do over the next three weeks also will be about functions of several variables and their derivatives.  f1 variable, that means you have the quantity that depends on a 1
parameter, maybe f depends on a variable x. And for example, a function that you all know is f of x equals sine x. And the way we would represent that is using maybe by plotting the graph of a function. So the graph of a function, we plot y equals f of x,  And the case of a sine function that looks like this. So now, let's say that we have a function of two
value.  of it could have any name you want. So given values of the two
parameters x and y, the function will give us a number that will call f of xy that depends on x and y according to some formula, not very surprising.  for example, I can give you a function f of xy equals x squared plus y squared. And of course, as with functions of 1 variable, we don't need things to be
defined everywhere, sometimes there's a domain of definition. So this one is defined all the time, but if I tell you, say, f of xy equals  square root of y, well, this is only defined if y is non-negative, or if I tell you f of xy equals 1 of x plus y, well, that's only
defined if x plus y is not 0 and so on.  examples, given by explicit formulas, and of course, there's
fysical examples, so examples coming from real life, for example, you can look at the temperature at the certain point in the surface of the earth, so you use maybe longitude latitude, latitude, that's x and y, and then you have f of xy equals the temperature at that point.  or, in fact, because temperature also depends on how high a plus or
up, it depends on elevation, so it's actually a function of maybe x, y, z, and it also depends on time, so, in fact, maybe it's a function of t, x, x, y, z
cordinates in space, so you see that real world functions  and depend on a lot of variables. So our goal will be to understand how to deal with it.  Now, you'll see very soon, but actually it's already tricky enough to picture a function of two variables. So we're going to focus on the case of functions of two variables, and then we'll see that if we have more than two
value variables, then it's harder to plot the function. We cannot draw what the graph looks like anymore, but the tools are the same, the number of partial derivatives, gradient vector, and so on, all the tools that we will  say, for simplicity, we'll focus mostly on 2 or
sometimes 3 variables, but it works the same in any number of variables. So the first question is, how do we visualize a function of 2 variables?  So the first thing we can do is try to hold the
graph of f, so maybe I should say f, which is a function of two variables. So the first answer will be we can try to look at its graph, and the idea is the same as with one variable,  we look at all the possible
value of the possible values of the parameters x and y, and for each of them, we plot a point whose height is the value of a function at these parameters.  a little plot, the point in space at
position x, y and z equals f of xy. And if we take all of these points together, they will give us some surface that sits in space.  a function of two-value of the I-obts if you want. So how do we do that concretely? Save it, I give you a
form you, therefore, f, how do we try to represent it? So let's do our first example, let's say that I give you a function f of xy equals negative y.  So it looks a little bit silly, because it doesn't
depend on x, but that's not a problem. It's still a valid function of x and y. Just happens to be constant with respect to x. So to draw a graph, we look at the surface in space, defined by z equals minus y, what kind of surface is that?  is equals minus y, we'll look, well, that's for y
exists, that's x-axis, that's the z-axis. If I look at what happens in the y-z plane in the plane of a blackboard, it will just look like a line that goes downward with slope 1.  x equal to 1, I mean, in front of a black board, or minus 1 at the back, well, it still looks
exactly the same. So I have this plane that actually contains the x-axis and slopes downwards with slope 1. It's kind of hard to draw. Now, you see immediately what the big problem with graphs will be, but this picture  So that's our first one. Any questions, so far? OK, so let's say that we have a slightly more complicated function, how do we see it? So let's do another example, let's say I give you f of xy equals 1 minus x squared minus y squared.  make sure what the surface, z equals 1 minus x squared minus y
square looks like. So how do we do that? Well, maybe you're actually very fast, and you've already figured out what it looks like. But if not, then we need to work piece by piece. So maybe it will help if we understand first what it does in the plane of a blackboard.  So if we look at it in the yz plane, that means we set x equal to 0, and then z becomes 1 minus y squared, what is that? It's a parabola, point in downward, and starting at 1.  starts at 1 and it cuts the y-axis at 1, when y is 1, that gives us 0. So we might have an idea of what it might look like, or maybe not. Let's get more slices. Let's see what it does in the xz plane, this other vertical plane that's
come in two orders.  So in the xz claim, means we set y equal to 0, and we get z equals 1 minus x squared, it's, again, a parabola coming downward. So I'm going to try to draw a parabola that goes downward, but now to the front and to the back. So we are starting to have a slightly better idea, but we still don't know whether a cross section of this thing
of this thing might be around square,  something else. So if we want more confirmation, we might want to also
figure out maybe where does this surface intersect the xy plane? So we hit the xy plane when z equals 0. That means 1 minus x square minus y squared should be 0,  that becomes x square plus y square plus y square
equal to 1, that is a circle of radius 1, that's the unit circle. So that means that here, we actually have the unit circle, and now you should imagine that you have this thing that when you slice it by a vertical plane looks like a downward parabola, and it's actually a surface of revolution  you can rotate it to the x-axis. Now, if you stay along enough at that
equation, you'll actually see that, yes, actually, at posteriori, we know that it had to be like that. So these are useful ways of trying to guess what the graph looks like. Of course, the other way is to just ask your computer to do it, and then you'll get that kind of formula.  well, I can leave it on if you want, but no, because I plotted a different function,
that I will show you later, so it goes this way. If you want 1 minus, I mean, it's really going downward. Yes, I agree that the sheet is upside down, but that's because I plotted something else.  was actually x squared plus y squared that looks like that, it's the same with a
parable that going up well. If you want to see my examples, I have these examples to throw, well, here's the graph of a function y squared minus x squared. So that one is kind of interesting.  and that's what we see to the left and to the right. But if you put it in the x, z-plane, then it's a parabola
value in downwards, z equals minus x squared. So we have a parabola going downwards in one direction, upper, and the other one, and together with this surface.  small things, and you can see the formula, but it doesn't matter, just to show you that you can put the
form your entry into a computer, and it will show you a picture.  So there's another way to plot functions of two variables, and let's call the control plot. So the control plot is a very elegant solution to the problem that it's difficult to draw space
pictures on a sheet of paper or an blackboard. So instead, let's try to represent a function of two variables  by just a map, the same way that when you work around, you have actually a
geographic map that fit on a piece of paper that tell you about what the real world looks like. So what a control plot looks like is something like this. So it's an xy plot, and on it, you have a bunch of curves, and what the curves represent the elevation  on the graph. So for example, this curve might correspond to all the
points where f of x, y equals 1, and that curve might be all the points where f equals 2, and f equals 3, and so on. So when you see this kind of plot, you're supposed to think that the graph of a function is, you know, somewhere sits in space, in space, so both that it's like a map,  And what you would want to do with a function really is be able to tell
quitely what's the value at a given point, well, let's say that I want to look at that point, I know that f is somewhere between 1 and 2, actually it's much faster to read than the graph.  that more precise, so this shows all of the points, where f of xy equals some fixed values, some fixed constants. And this constant typically are chosen at
idecular intervals.  So for example, here I chose 1, 2, 3, and they could continue with
0, minus 1 and so on. So one way to think about it, how does this relate to the graph?  of by horizontal planes. So horizontal planes have equations of a form z equals some constant, z equals 0, z equals 1, z equals 1, z equals 2, and so on. So maybe the equivalent of my function will be some sort of blob out there. And if I split it by the plane
z equals 1,  then I will get for a level curve, which is the point square f of xy equals 1, and so that's called a
level curve of f. And so we repeat the process with, if it is equals 2,  and we get another level of a curve, and so on, and then we squeeze them all on the map, and that's how we get the control plot.  along that path, and it will get you there without effort. So in fact, if you have been talking about hiking and
mountains, well, that's exactly what a topographical map is about. So I need to zoom a bit. So a topographic map, this one is from the US Geological Survey, shows you, basically,  for the level curves of an altitude function on a piece of land. So you know that if you work along these curves, you will
stay at the same height, and you know that if you work towards, or if you don't have numbers, let me find a place with numbers.  if you work towards the mountain, that's, I think, is below it, then you will go up, and so on. So you can see, for example, here, there's a peak, and while here, the value with the value of the river in it, and the
alternates go down and then back up again on the other side. So that's an example of a control plot of a function, of course, we don't have a formula for that function, but we have a control plot, and that's what we need, actually, to understand what's going on there.  OK, any questions? So another example of control plots, well, you've probably seen
the various versions of these temperature maps. So that's supposed to be how one it is right now. So this one is color-coded instead of having curves, it has all of these colors, but the effect is the same.  consecutive corners, these are the level curves of a function that tells you the
temperature at a given point. So these are examples of control plots in real life.  is becoming familiar with the control plot, the control plot, the graph, and how to view and deal with functions.  example, well, let's do a couple of examples. So let's start with f of xy equals minus y. I'm going to take the same two examples as
there to start with so that we see a really correlation between the graph and the contour plot. So let's try to plot it. So where's the level curve f equals 0 for this one?  well, f is 0 when y is 0, so that's the x axis, so that's the
level 0. Where's the level 1? Well, f is 1, when negative y is 1, that means when y is negative 1, so let's go to minus 1, and that will be where my level 1 is, and so on, f is 2 when y  is negative 2, f is negative 1 when y is 1, and so on. Is that convincing? Do you see how we got that? Let me do it again. I didn't see anybody nodding, so that's kind of bad news. So if I want to know where is the level of
calf say 1, I try to set f equal to 1, let's do this one. f equals 1,  means that negative y is 1 means that y is minus 1, and y equals minus 1 is this
horizontal line on this chart, and same with the obvious. So you can see on this map that the value of a function doesn't depend on x. If you move parallel to the x-axis, nothing happens. If you move in the y direction, it decreases at a constant rate, that's why the controls are even less  How spaced about there, I'll tell you, is you actually
how steep things are. So that corresponds exactly to that picture, except that here we draw x coming to the front and y to the right, so you have to rotate the map by 90 degrees to get to that.  how is on total lengths?  it's really the same thing. So x, y, let's see, where is this function equal to 0? Well, we say f is 0 on the unit circle. So the 0 level, let's say that this is my unit,  that's where it's 0. What about f equals 1? Well, that's 1, x squared plus y squared equals 0. Well, that's only going to be here, so that's just a single point.  x1, x square plus y square equals 2, that's a circle of radius square root of 2, which is
about 1.4, so it's somewhere here.  So what I want to show here is that, so that's minus 3, that's minus 2, what I want to show here is that they're getting closer and closer and closer about. So first, it's concentric circles that tells us that we have a shape that a solid of the graph is going to be a surface of revolution, things don't change if I rotate. And second, the level of the
level curves are getting closer and closer to each other, that means it's getting steeper and steeper,  have to travel a shorter distance if I want my
alternative to change by 1. So this top here is kind of flat, and then it gets steeper and steeper, and that's what we observe on that picture over.  but looks like this, maybe actually I'll make it. So it looks exactly the same as this one, but the difference is if you can see the numbers which are not there, so you can see them, then you would know that instead of decreasing as we move out, this one is increasing as we go out. So that's where we use the label on the
level curves, but tell us whether things are going up or down.  but the control plot looks exactly the same. For the next one I had, I think, was y squared minus x squared, so the control plot, let me actually zoom out. So the control plot looks like that. So the level of the course of course,
mine to 0 is actually two diagonal lines, and if you look on the plot, say that you started the  a middle, and you try to try to stay at the same
level, so it looks like a mountain pass, well, there's actually four directions from that point that you can go staying at the same height, and actually on the map, they look exactly like these two crest crossing lines.  all right, then you go towards positive values. And if you go along the x axis, then you get
two out negative values. The equation for the function was y square minus x squared. So you can try to plot them by hand, confirm that it does look like that.  And finally, this one, well, so the control plot looks a bit complicated, that you can see two things. In the middle, you can see these two origins with these concentric circles, to the non-atrearily
circles, but these closed curves that are concentric and they correspond to the two mountains. And then at some point in the middle, we have a mountain pass, and there we see the two crossing  means, again, like on the plot of y square minus x squared, and so at this
certain point here, if we go north or south, then we'll go down on either side to the valley, and if we go east or west, then we'll go towards the mountains, we'll go up.  Hopefully, we'll get used to it very soon. So let's say, 1, so I want to point out one thing. The control plot tells us, actually, what happens when we move, when we change x and y.  So if I change the value of x and y, that means I'm moving east west or north south on the map, and then I can ask myself, does the
value of a function increase or decrease in each of these situations?  So, so say, for example, that I have a piece of
contropleot that looks, like that  maybe this is f equals 1, and this is f equals 2, and here this is f equals 0. And let's say that I start at a point, say at this point. So here I have x0, y0, and the question I might ask myself is, if I change x or y, how does f change?  if x increases and I keep y constant, then what happens to f of xy? Well, it will increase because if I move to the right, then I go from 1 to a value bigger than 1. I don't know exactly how much, but I know that it's somewhere between 1 and 2, it's more than 1.  And similarly, I can tell that if y increases, then f, well, looks like if I increase y, then f will also increase, and if y decreases, then f decreases. And that's the kind of qualitative analysis that we can do easily from the control plot. But maybe we'd like to actually be more precise than that, and tell how fast f  if I change x sub y. So to find the right of change, that's exactly where we use derivatives. So we are going to have to deal with partial derivatives. So I will explain to you
sune why partial.  So let me just remind you first, if you have a function of
one variable, then let's say f of x, then you have a derivative, f prime of x is also called df dx, and it's defined as a limit when delta x goes to 0 of the change in f  So it's not going to fit, I need to go to the next line, it's going to be a
equal limit as delta x goes to 0 of the rate of change, so the change in f between x and x plus delta x divided by delta x. Sometimes you write delta f for the change in f,  limit of this rate of increase as delta x goes to 0. Now, of course, if you have a formula for f, then you know, at least you
food know, I suspect most of you know how to actually take the derivative of a function from its formula.  means on the graph. So if I plot the graph of a function, and I have my point x, and here I have f of x, how do I
see the derivative? Well, I look at the tangent line 2 over graph, and the slope of a tangent line is f prime of x. And I'm  you have functions that are not, no, regular enough, to actually have a derivative. So in this class, we are not going to actually worry too much about
differentiability, but it's good at least to be aware that you can't always take a derivative.  which says that if we have the value of f at some point x0, and then we want to find the
value at a nearby point, x close to x0, then our best guess is that it's f of x0 plus the derivative f prime at x0 times delta x, so if you want x minus x0,  Is this kind of familiar to you? Yeah, maybe with different notation, maybe you
equal to that delta x or something, maybe you call that x0 plus h or something, but it's the usual approximation formula using the derivative. If you put more terms, then you get the dreaded
proximation that I know that you guys don't like.  is how do we do the same for a function of two
value of f of xy? So the difficulty of R is we can change x or we can change y or we can change both. And presumably, for the manner in which f changes will be different depending on whether we change x or y. So that's why we have several different  So, so we have another thing,
and I'm not going to
do it,  So this is a curly d, and it is not a straight d, and it is not a delta, it's a d that kind of curls backwards, like that. And the way you're really simple is partial. So it's the special notation for partial derivatives, and essentially what it means is we are going to do a derivative where we care about only one
value at a time, that's why it's partial, it's missing  over our variables. So a function of several variables doesn't have a
eval derivative, it has only partial derivatives for each variable. So the partial derivative, the partial f, partial x at x0, y0, is defined to be the limit when I take a small change in x delta x  the changing f divided by delta x. So here, I'm actually not changing y at all, I'm just changing x and looking at the
orate of change with respect to x. And I have the same, with respect to y, partial f, partial y, is the limit, so I should say,  x0, y0 is the limit as delta y tends to 0 of, so this time I keep x
for saying that I change y. So that's the definition of a partial derivative, and we say that a function is differentiable if this thing exists.  will see are they French-abled and we'll actually learn how to compute the partial derivatives without having to do this, of course, we'll just use the
usual methods for computing derivatives. So in fact, I claim you already know how to take partial derivatives.  So, geometrically, my function can be represented by its gif, and I fixed some point x0, y0, and then I'm going to ask myself what happens if I change the
value of x, if I change the value of x, keeping y constant.  x, it means I'm moving forward or backward parallel to the x axis, so that
that determines, for me, a vertical plane, parallel to the x is a plane when I fix y equals constant. And now, if I slice the graph by that, I will get some curve that goes, it's a slice of the graph of f.  And now what I want to find is how f depends on x if I keep y constant, that means it's the rate of change if I move along this curve. So in fact, if I look at the slope of this thing, so if I draw a tangent line to this
less, then the slope will be partial f of our partial x.  picture of that somewhere, here it is. That's the same picture, just with
different colors. So I take the graph, I slice it by a vertical plane, I get a curve, and now I take the slope of that curve, and that gives me the partial derivative. And finish, let me just tell you how, so I should say,  is the same thing, but slicing now by a plane that goes in the yz
directions, so I fix x equals constant, that means I slice by a plane that's parallel to the blackboard, I get a curve, and I look at the slope of that curve. So it's just a matter of fongating one variable setting it constant and looking at the other one, so how to compute these things,  we actually to find, does a piece of notation I haven't told you yet. So an other notation you will see, I think this is what one
use is a lot in physics, and this is what one uses a lot in applied math, which is the same thing as physics, but with different notation. So there's two different notation, partial f, partial x, or f subscript x, and they're the same thing.  and x as variable, and vice versa, if we want to find partial with respect to y. So let me just finish with one quick example, let's say that I give you f of xy equals x
y plus y squared, then partial f partial x, well, let's take the derivative  So here, it's x cubed times a constant, the derivative of x cubed is free times x squared times the constant plus what's the
derivative of y squared 0 because it's a constant. If you do instead partial f partial y, then this is actually a constant times y, the derivative of y is 1, so that's just x cubed, and the derivative of y squared is 2y.  which one is a variable, which one is not? So more about this next time, and we'll also learn about
about the maximum and minimum and minimum in several variables.