 We'll continue our discussion of the Riemann integral, so let me just recall a few bits of notation from last time, and then also the main
result that we proved at the end of last class.  We had partitions, which are just finite sets, so here is less than b, and we're looking at an interval a, b, partitions, they're just finite sets of a, b, and then we also had tags, which were finite sets as well,  with c1 between x0 and x1, which is less than or equal to x2, which is less than or equal to x2, and so on, and we call these tag partition  And we also had the norm of a partition, this is the max. So we think of partitions as breaking up the interval a, b
up into smaller subintervals, x0 to x1,  I'm going to get a different piece of chalk, this one is going to
go in psychedelic on me, and then the xc ones are just points chosen in these smaller subintervales, the norm of a partition is the length of the largest sub-interval, and then we had the remun  the sum associated to a partition, tag partition, xc, which is the sum from j equals 1 to n, f of xc j, x j minus x j minus x j minus 1.  what did we prove the following theorem, which is the
existence for the Riemann interval, which is the following that for all continuous functions on a, b, there exists a unique number, which we denote interval a, b, f, with the  property that with the following property, that if I take any sequence of tag
partitions with norm going to 0, so this is the partitions are getting finer and finer, for all sequence of tag partitions,  with norms going to 0, we have that the associated Riemann sums, this sequence converges, so this is now a sequence of real numbers, and equals this
number interval a, b, b, f.  no matter what sequence of tag partitions I take with the
norms converging to 0, the remodelsums converge to this number, which we call the remodnate interval of f.  out. So now we're going to discuss some properties of the Riemann integral. So the next is that, in some sense,  the area of the union, if you like, is the sum of the areas, if we think of the interval as being the
area underneath the curve. So this next property is the additivity of the Riemann integral, which states are following, if f is in c, a, b,  and I take a point between c and b, then the interval from a to b of f is equal to the
interval from a to c of f plus c interval inf, c to b of f.  all we know about these numbers is that they satisfy this property. So what we'll do is we'll take a sequence of tag partitions of a, c converging to this
interval and a sequence of tag partitions from c to b converging to this interval when I stick them into the Riemann sums.  that's the basic intuition, and of course, what was I saying a minute ago about the
area of the union being some of the areas? Well, again, like I said, if we think of the remount integral as being the area underneath the curve, then this says that the area from a to b underneath the curve  the area underneath the curve from a to c plus the
c plus the area underneath the curve from c to b.  So the sequence of partitions of a sequence of tack partitions, I should say, of ac such that the norm of this
partition goes to 0, so this  is a now a partition of ac, and then we'll take another sequence of
tag partitions of cb, and for those watching at home, wondering what these letters are,  it's a Greek eta, that's the Greek zeta. So we have a sequence of
partitions of ac, these are the y and eta, and then we also have a sequence of partitions of cb, such that the norm of these guys go to 0 as well as R goes to infinity  OK, so now if I have a partition of a, c in a partition of cb, if I take their
union, then I will get a partition of a, b, this will be the union of these guys,  So it's easy to see that this is now a sequence of tag partitions of a, b.  And moreover, so what is the norm of this new tag partition, what is the maximum
length of the subinterval's, and what is the maximum length of the sub interval, as well?  of the norm of y, R and the norm of z are, and since both of these converges to 0, the maximum of them also
converges to 0. So now we just put this all together.  this theorem, what do we know? We know that the Riemann sum associated to this converges to the integral a, b of f, the Riemann sum associated to this
sequence of tag partition  converges to L ac, f, and then this sequence of the
remonsums associated to these tag partitions converge to cb, f. And now we just use the fact that taking a remon sum  additive, right? Since the remunsum, the remunsum associated to this partition, which is just a union of these partitions,  this implies taking the limit as R goes to infinity, the left-hand side, as I wrote down here, converges to a, b, f, and then the limit of the sum is the sum of the limit, so this converges to a, c, f, and then the right thing here converges to the second
thing here, converges to the second thing here, converges to the  from c to b at f, and that's it. So really, the fact that the interval as additive
of the interval is additive follows from the simple fact that kind of Riemann sums are additive, and the fact that limits respect algebraic operations, the limit of the sum is the sum of the limits,  OK? So the Riemann integral is additive, this is, and also linear, so we see that the Riemann integral is something that respects
kind of algebraic value  the break operations with respect to the real numbers, namely adding and scalar multiplication, and it respects what you could say, topological considerations, not really topological, but this additive property  a very natural property, what am I getting at here? So now, one could ask, how does the
intergal interact with inequality? So this is something we ask about all limits, our least limits of sequences that we saw, if one sequence lies below another one, taking limits respects that.  the second derivative in the derivative of the smaller one be bigger than the
derivative of the first one, but so one can ask the question, let's suppose I have two functions, one smaller than the other, what is the, what is the, what's the relationship between the intervals?  So suppose f and g are now two continuous functions, 1, a, b.  if for all x in a, b, f of x is less than or equal to g of x, then the interval
from a, b of f is less than or equal to the interval from a, b of g. And this is kind of understandable. Again, if we think of the interval as being a theory of the area underneath the curve, if I have one function sitting above, another function, then the area  bigger than the area of a smaller one underneath the
curve, which sits below the first one. And now, the Riemann integral is a limit of sums, in some sense, and a limit of certain sums involving f, and what?  being sums and absolute values with the triangle inequality, which says the absolute value of the sum is less than or equal to the sum of the absolute
values, and if you think of the interval as being essentially in a limit of sums, or if you like a continuous sum, then you should expect that the absolute value of the interval is less than or equal to the
interval of the absolute value of the absolute value, and that's, indeed, what we have.  second is the absolute value of the interval from a, b of f is less than or equal to the
interval from a, b of the absolute value of f. So like this is the triangle inequality for intervals.  using, again, the main property we have about the main property, we have about
remond intervals that they satisfy this property, and then we'll deduce 2 directly from number 1.  converging to 0, then for all R, if we take the Riemann sum with respect to f of this tag partition, this is equal to, which equals 1 to n, this is just  R here is just indexing the sequence of tag partitions, I should say this doesn't have to end at
some single number, in fact, the can't in common with all of these tag partitions.  of partition points that we have in our partition x, superscript R, and since we're assuming f of x is less than or equal to g of x
for all x in a, b, this is less than or equal to sum from d equals 1 to n of R, g of c j of R, R, R, and R.  What is this last thing, this last thing is just equal to the
remond sum of g with respect to this tag partition x and xc. So we started off with the remondesum associated to f, and we showed that's less than or equal to  just kind of summarizing here that this sum of sum is less than or equal to this
remum sum. So now, if I take the limit as R goes to infinity, this on the left-hand side approaches the interval from a, b,  And since limits respect inequalities, I get this, which is what we wanted to prove.  quickly, so since plus or minus f is less than or equal to the absolute value of f, we get that plus or minus, so
interval of plus or minus f is less than or equal to the interval from a, b of the absolute value. Now, a scalar multiplication we proved last time, plus L, so that means  plus or minus the interval of f is less than or equal to the
interval of the absolute value of f, which is the same as, so for the minus sign, this tells me this inequality, and for the plus sign, I get that inequality, but that's equivalent to saying that the absolute  value of the integral of f is less than or equal to the
interval of the absolute value of the absolute value. And that's the proof of the theorem.  And this will be an exercise on the homework to prove this is the following. Well, we know that taking limits respects inequalities, but not necessarily
stricken inequalities. So I can have two sequences, one strictly less than the other for all n, and then as n goes to infinity, their limits could, in fact, equal each other.  example, if I take the first sequence to be 0, the second sequence to be 1 over n, 1 over n is
always bigger than 0, yet they both converge to 0. So taking limits does not respect strict inequality. However, in this setting, which is very nice, it's actually an extremely important  property of the integral is that this limiting
process that we do to take intervals, in fact, does, it's not just in the old limiting process, it actually does respect strict inequality.  function, and it's positive, then we already know that the interval of f is going to be non-negative by what we just proved, but in fact, the
interval of f is positive. And again, so this is also important from a psychological standpoint, if we're thinking of the  as being a theory of the area underneath the curve, so what this state is that, and again, I'm not going to prove this, this will be
on the assignment.  a theory of the area underneath the curve should be. So this says if a continuous
function is positive, so like the picture I drew, you then the integral, which we interpret, again, as the area underneath the curve is positive, so that matches what our desire for this to be a theory of the area underneath the curve should be.  And so we have, if you like, we could have proved this from basic considerations in what the definition of the interval is, but we have the following theorem that for all alpha and R,  I could just say the following.  I'm going a little off script here, but it's OK. So we actually haven't computed a single
interval yet. Really, it's tough to with this definition, and a minute we'll prove the fundamental theorem of calculus and be able to do it very easily.  from a, b of the function 1 equals b minus a. So what's the proof? Take a sequence of partitions with a, with a
norms converging to 0, and we just look at the Riemann sum.  and for 1, this will be quite easy to compute what the Riemann sums are. So this is a sequence of
partitions with norm converging to 0, then if I look at, so c a did Riemann sums, this is equal to j equals 1, 2n  no matter what x c is, I just get 1, and then times the
length of the interval, the sub interval, this is a telescopoping sum, which, meaning this is equal to x1 minus x0 plus x2 minus x1 plus xn plus up until xn minus xn minus 1, so all I pick up  is not x1, but x0 and xn, so this is equal to x j of R, sorry, of R minus x0 of R, and this is the last point in the partition, this is the first point in the partition, and as always for partitions, the last
point is b, the first point is a.  is equal to b minus a. And now, this thing on the left-hand side is equal to b minus a, so this
tells me that the interval, which is equal to this limit of Riemann sums is equal to b minus a.  when you see this last week was to essentially compute the interval for the
interval from a, b of x, dx.  the area, so let me draw a picture so that this is not so surprising. Let's say I have a function from a, b, there's the function f, and so that was supposed to go through this point, so let's make that a little bit.  OK, suppose I don't need these parts, but OK. Let's say I have, so for a continuous function, it always achieves a minimum and a minimum in maximum, and at least for this picture, the minimum
meanum occurs here, the maximum occurs here. Now, what's the comparison about areas from this picture  well, the area underneath the curve of f will be bigger than or equal to the
area underneath the curve of the constant function equal to little m sub f, and that's just b times a times m sub f, again, by intuition, but this is also seen from the theorem we just proved along with the linearity of the Riemann integral, which we've already proved, and the interval of f the area underneath this curve is also less than or equal to  the area underneath the curve where f achieves a maximum. It's the 12th week of class, and I so I haven't
brought a colored chalk, so hopefully that was clear enough without me having the color stuff in. So the theorem is the following, if f, again, we're working with continuous functions, because that's all we can integrate or are going to integrate in this section  And I have these two numbers, the inf of f of x, which we know is, in fact, a min, meaning there exists a point in here. So in fact, I'm going to write min, we know that by the min max theorem, that for every continuous
function, it achieves this minimum,  and max, then as I was saying a minute ago, the area underneath the curve M, little m sub f, which is this smaller square, is less than or equal to the
area underneath the curve of f, so little m sub f times b minus a, the area underneath  the minimum is less than or equal to the area underneath the
curve of f, which is less than or equal to the area underneath the curve of the taller line capital M sub f. So how do we prove this? Well, we just used these previous two theorems,  since little m sub f is less than or equal to capital M sub f, so since little
n sub f is less than or equal to f of x, which is less than or equal to capital M sub f for all x in a, b, we can apply that theorem up there to get that the integral of little m sub f, again, this is just a fixed number  is less than or equal to the interval from a, b of f. And now, again, these are just fixed numbers. So by what we proved here, that the interval from a to b of 1 is b minus a, and the fact that scalar's
pull out, so this number here can come out, and this is just m sub f times the interval from a, b of 1, so this is little m sub f  And over here, this is capital M sub f times b minus a, and that's the proof. So now let me make a few comments about some
conventions, or really,  So we've been talking about at least I've been talking about you're not here, so we haven't
been talking at all. So we've been talking about the interval from a, b to f when a is less than b, but I'm going to use, I'm just going to set down some kind of convention or you could say this is really notation,  that when I write down this symbol, interval a to a of f, this is really just another way of writing 0, and another is that if, in fact, b is less than a, then the interval from a, b to f  So remember, we've been talking about the intervals from
over intervals, or where the number on the bottom is less than the number on the top. So whenever I write this symbol with the bigger number on the bottom and the smaller number on the top, you should read this as minus the interval  in the right place, meaning this number here is less than this number here, and so one, again, these are really just
notations that if I write this, this is a fancy way of writing 0. When I write this, this means minus the integral with the right numbers on top and bottom, meaning the smaller numbers on the bottom, the bigger numbers on the top,  And so maybe you ask, so this is why do I define that to be 0? Well, if you like, one is consistent with the fact that for all continuous functions, if I take the interval from a to b with b bigger than  and I take the limit as b goes to a, this equals 0. And 2 is then consistent with number 1 and then
additivity, with at  at activity at number 1, because then by number 1, I get that the so addativity will tell me that the interval from a to a of f is equal to the
interval from a, b to f plus the interval from b a, f here assuming b is less than a. And so if by 1, this is 0, then to be consistent with additivity, this would force the interval from a, b to f to b minus the interval  of f. So both of these conventions, if you like, are consistent with the properties of the Riemann integral, namely that the limit as b goes to a of the area underneath this curve as the base gets smaller and smaller
and smaller is 0, and then if I assume this,  then additivity tells me that the interval from a, b has to be minus the
n and go from b to a of f. So now, we computed successfully one interval, and of course, when you took calculus, that was not all you could do,  calculus is what it is because of the hero of the story, which is a fundamental
theorem of calculus, which is what we'll prove now.  big f, so first off, let little f be continuous function. So the first statement is if, basically, how to compute
intervals if capital f and a real from a, b to R is  Differentiable, everywhere on a, b, and f prime equals little f, then the
interval from a, b of little f equals f of b minus f of a. Another way of stating this is that the interval from a, b of capital f prime  f of b minus f of a, and then the second part, so the first part is about computing
intervales. The second part is about solving differential equations, basically.  of f, so for each x and a, b, so I stick it in as the upper limit on this
interval, this function is differentiable on a, b,  and it satisfies a simplest differential
equation, which is g prime equals f and g of a equals 0. So this is a fundamental theorem of calculus, the first part being about how do you compute intervals, the second, how do you compute solutions to a differential equation?  g prime equals little f, so little f is the given, I want to find a function g that satisfies g
prime equals little f with an initial condition, capital g of a equals 0, that's given by this function here where I take little f and I integrate it from a to x. So that's how I interpret the fundamental theorem of calculus the first about solving
interpreels the second about solving differential equations.  So this is a hero of calculus, the Batman of the story, and I said at one point that the main value
theorem is the Alfred of this story, and therefore, it should play a decisive role in proving this theorem,  So we're going to connect these two things, so in order to even get at this guy, we have to take a
partition, a sequence of partitions converging,  with norm converging to 0, and then see what we get. So this is the proof of part 1. So let's take a sequence of tag partitions, I keep for getting to write tag and say the word tag, but you should
here that even though  I don't say it with norm, actually, we're not even going to, this is correct. So I'm actually going to come up with the tags in a minute. So let's first take a sequence of partition, so this is actually
completely correct, so no tags yet, no points chosen in between with  converging to 0, and then I'm going to choose a special tag for each R so that in the limit, I get this
equality between the interval of f and capital f of b minus f, capital f of a.  sub interval x sub j minus 1 and x sub j, so by the mean value theorem, there exists for each j, there exists a point in between these two guys,  such that by take f of x of j, R minus f. So capital f, remember, is this function that's
differentiable and whose derivative gives me little f, this is equal  capital f prime of xc j of R times x j minus x j minus 1, and by assumption, the
dereverative of capital f is equal to little f. So I'm going to replace this f prime with little f. So now these xc's I will take as my tag  my sequence of tags, put a star by this relation here, then what do we conclude if I look at the
remond sum for f associated to now,  this sequence of tags where now the x c's are exactly these x c's that satisfy this
satisfy, this is equal to, as before, sum from j equals 1, 2 in the R, f of xg, c sub j, now by how these x c's were chosen, remember, they were chosen to satisfy  this relation here star, by the mean value theorem, so this is equal to the sum from j
equals 1 to n sub R, f of x sub j minus f of x sub j minus 1. And again, this is a telescopoping sum. And so all I pick up is when j equals n sub n of R, the last point,  j equals 0, so this is equal to f of the last point, minus f of the first
point, now for partition, this is always b, and this is always a, so this is f of b minus f of a. So every one of these  tag partitions gives me f of b minus f of a, so then I take the limit and I get
the interval. And therefore, the interval from a, b to f, which is the limit as R goes to infinity of s of f, equals, and we just computed this is always equal to f of b minus f of a,  So we took a sequence of just a recap, we took a sequence of partitions with
norms converging to 0, and we chose special tags using the mean value theorem. So by the mean value theorem, on each one of these subintervals, capital f evaluated at the right and point minus f evaluated at the left end point, is equal to f, which  the derivative of capital f evaluated at some point in
between times the length of the interval. So now, if we take the Riemann sum associated to this sequence of tag partitions where these xc's are defined by this condition, then we can actually compute this Riemann sum, and it just gives me f of b minus f of a no matter what R is. So then when I take the limit as R goes to infinity, the left side goes to the interval  but it's always equal to capital f of b minus f of a, so that
proves number 1. So for number 2, what do we want to show?  So first off, it's by convention g of a, which is the n and
or a from a to a of f, this is 0. So I don't have to check the second condition. I just need to check that this function is differentiable, and the derivative of that function is a little f.  want to show, the derivative of capital g is equal to little f, so we'd like to show that the limit as x
goes to c of the interval from a to x of f minus g and a to c of f over x minus c, which is, this is just g of x minus g of c,  So we're going to do this by the books, by the book, when I say it, so that's kind of a bad pun, I guess, I don't know, but meaning an epsilon delta proof for this limit, so let epsilon be positive, the delta that we pick in the end,  at c. So since f is continuous at c, there exists a delta 0 positive such that what, t minus c less than delta, 0,  t minus f of c is less than epsilon, let's give ourselves a little
room over 2, choose delta to be this delta 0. Remember, we have to show for every epsilon, there exists a delta so that if x minus c is less than delta, then this minus this, and absolute value is less than epsilon.  this right here, as long as t minus c is less than
delta 0. Now, because of sine conventions, we'll do two cases, so not really, I'm just going to do 1k.  x is between c and c plus delta, so we want to also show, we also need to be able to do the case that x is
between c minus delta and c that would cover the whole range of the absolute value of x minus c is less than delta, but bigger than 0, I'm just going to do this case.  then this thing minus this thing in absolute value is less than epsilon. So first off, I would like to note that if this interval c to x, then that tells me that the absolute value of
t minus c, which is equal just  of t minus c, this is less than or equal to x minus c, which is less than delta, and
remember, this equals delta 0. So as long as I'm in this interval here, the absolute value of t minus c is less than delta 0. So let me just draw a picture so that this is pretty clear, this length is delta, if I take any t in between,  distance from t to c is also going to be less than delta, so that's all I've
written down. Thus, by now compute the difference quotient minus the proposed limit, so I'm looking at 1 over x minus c times the interval  minus the integral from a to c of f minus f of c, this is the thing I want to show is
less than epsilon. Now, by additivity, the interval from a to x, and x, for the interval from a to x of f is equal to the interval from a to c plus the interval from c to x.  from c to x of f minus f of c, now this is just a fixed number. And therefore, I'm going to do a little trick, minus the interval from, so in fact, let me throw in some
integrate  the ratio variable so that this becomes clear. So this is f of t, dt, minus, and a
road of f of t, dt, I've been using the notation where I just don't write down the integration variable, but let me do that here, f of t, dt, minus f of c.  Now, this is equal to minus f of c over x minus c, integral from c to x of 1 dt, right? Because the interval from c to x of the constant 1 gives me x minus c that cancels with this guy. Now, f of c is just a number, it's just a fixed number. So I can bring this inside the interval and then use the linearity of the
interval 2  to, in fact, rewrite all of this as 1 over the absolute value of x minus c, and a
over from c to x of f of t minus f of c, dt, and absolute value. Now, 1 over x minus c, this is positive because x is bigger than c. So I can  And now, what do I know? For T in between this between c and x, the absolute value of
t minus c is less than delta 0, so by what I have here, as long as I'm in this interval cx, I'm going to have this inequality hold.  apply the triangle inequality for
intervales, this is less than or equal to the interval from c to x of f of g minus f of c. So by the second thing that I've underlying for t in this interval c to x, this thing here is always less than epsilon over 2.  be less than or equal to 1 over interval x minus c, interval c to x, epsilon over 2, dt. And now this is just equal to, so this is a number, it comes out, so I get 1, interval from c to x of 1, so I get x minus c, so times the interval of 1, so x minus c, and that  less than epsilon. And so this was for x between c and c plus delta, the argument for c
between c and c minus delta is essentially the same, just with minus sine changes.  since c implies that the interval from a to x of f minus interval a to c of f over x minus c, minus f of c is less than epsilon. So we've done x between c minus delta and c, x between c and c plus delta, which implies that if  which is what we wanted to proof.  OK, so we've concluded the proof of the Batman of the story, and this gives us not only a way of computing
intergrals, but useful way of if you like, shifting the burden or shifting the blame whenever we do compute the interval of certain product,  what I'm talking about is the integration by parts, which I can't remember if I said it was first or second, I think it was second. First, most useful thing from
analysis is the triangle inequality, the second being integration by parts, and a close third being the Cauchy shorts inequality, which in conjunction with integration by parts is  research current research papers are based on these two things, and
using them in a very clever way. So integration by parts is, suppose f and g are,  the derivatives exist on a, b, and there are also continuous. So if you hear me say,
continuously, differentiable in the future, that means that the function has a derivative that's continuous.  with some sort of burden, this is equal to f of b times g of b minus f of a times g of a minus the
interval from a to b, and now we shift that burden to g times g prime. So let me put a parentheses around that so you can, let's do it this way, g prime f.  and put it on g. And what's the proof? The proof is just the fundamental
theorem of calculus in the product rule, since the derivative of f times g is equal to f prime times g plus g prime times f, we get by the fundamental theorem of calculus, the integral, maybe of, let's say, the right-hand side.  f prime g plus g prime f is equal to the interval from a to b of f times g prime, so by the
fondamental theorem of calculus. And now, the integral of the derivative is the function evaluated at the endpoints, so that's f of b times g of b minus f of a times g  So that's integration by parts, which is a consequence of the product rule.  the quotient role is something, it's just really the product, the product
roll in disguise, so we don't get really anything new from there. But we also remember have the chain rule, which then results in the change of variables, formula, so theorem,  be, be, the
continuously differentiable, so this means the function is continuous and its derivative is also continuous, with the property that the derivative is positive  on a, b, p of a equals c, b of b equals d. So you can think of f as being a change of
variables from c to d to a, b. Then the integral from c to d  of f of u, d, u is equal to interval from a to b, f of f of p of x, a prime of x, dx. So maybe instead of change of variables, so this is a, k  you substitution where you set u equal to f of x, then d u is equal to f
prime of x dx. And again, the proof of this just follows from the fundamental theorem of calculus and the chain rule that we know.  of function from a, b to R such that f prime equals little f, we can always find 1 by the second part of the
fundamental theorem of calculus. We can always solve this differential equation up to a constant.  f prime of f of f of x times f prime of x, which equals f of p of x, p
prime of x. So then when I integrate that, interval from a, b, of f of x, f of f of f  the prime of x, dx, this is equal to the interval from a, b of f of p of x prime dx. Now, by part 1 of the fundamental theorem of calculus, this is equal to the interval of the derivative is this thing evaluated at the end point, so f of b of b minus f of b  OK, this is equal to f of d minus f of c, because f of b equals d, f of c, f of a equals c, and f of b equals d. But again, by the fundamental theorem of calculus, since capital f is, when you differentiate, it gives me little f, this is equal to the interval from c to d of f prime, of
up, which is equal to f of u, which is equal  to f of you d, again, so we just apply the fundamental theorem of calculus
really three times, first to find a function whose derivative is little f, then we use a chain rule to conclude that the derivative of capital f of f of f equals this thing, which is the thing we're integrating on the right-hand side, so that when we integrate that, that's equal to the integral of a derivative, and therefore, we just pick up the endpoints  f of d minus f of c, but because capital f is equal to, is an any derivative of a little f, meaning it's
the derivative of its little f, it's also this number here is also equal to this interval here, which is this guy.  which is the integration by parts, and then we'll move on to
sequences of functions.