 OK, so last time we were talking about sequences, and I introduced a notion of a limit of a sequence, so we say that xn converges to x if for all
epsilon positive there exists  and M, a natural number, such that for all little n bigger than or equal to capital M, we have x sub n minus x is less than epsilon. So what this definition says is that, given any little bit of tolerance, as long as I go far enough out in the sequence, the entries are getting
within that tolerance to x. And when xn converges to x, we'll write x is equal to the limit as n goes to infinity of x sub n,  using this notation, x sub n arrow x. And so I said before that, if you ever have a reasonably
complicated or interesting definition you should try to come up with examples and negate it, so the end of last time we saw few examples of at least one example of a convergent sequence, let's negate this definition,  So come up with an example of a sequence, which is not
converge, and so the negation of this definition is that xn does not converge to x, what does this mean?  it becomes there exists, and whenever we negate there exists, it becomes a for all. So there exists some bad epsilon 0 positive
such that for all natural numbers n, there exist an n bigger than or equal to M such that xn minus x is bigger than or equal to this bad epsilon 0  distance. So we have a picture that goes along with convergence, we can have a picture that goes along with a
sequence not converging to x, so this means if I go out within this bad epsilon 0, and if I go arbitrarily out in the sequence, I can always find an element x sub n, which is not in that interval.  And we use this negation to prove a certain
sequence does not converge to x, but let's go back do another example of a sequence which does converge.  Now, as the proof go, you have to verify the definition of the limit. I mean, there's nothing else that we have to
use right now, so let epsilon be positive. And now, off to the side over here, I'm going to do a little bit of work to show you how, in practice, one would find such a capital M, or choose a capital M to get that 1 over n squared plus 30n plus 1  1 for n bigger than or equal to capital M. So typically how this works is,
unlike and calculus where you have some inequality that you want to get and then you solve for n, an analysis, what's great is that you can replace that thing you want to make small by something simpler and then solve that inequality, what do I mean?  do, I want to find M so that if M is bigger than or equal to M, then so I'm saying the limit is 0, so I want to
show 1 over n squared plus 30n plus 1 is less than epsilon. Now, I could try to solve this inequality for n, but this is a quadratic function, and imagine I put 20 there,  So I can't exactly solve exactly for n to guarantee this, but what's great about analysis is that I don't have to work that hard.  plus 1. So this 1 is only making things bigger, I'm going to do this
very slowly. So this is less than or equal to this because for this, I've just added 1 to the denominator, and 1 over n squared plus 30n, this certainly looks a little bit simpler to solve for n less than epsilon,  n squared because n squared is positive, so that's only
making the bottom bigger, so I have 1 over 30n, and this is certainly less than or equal to 1 over n.  1 is less than epsilon. If this thing is less than epsilon, then by this string of inequalities, this thing will be less than epsilon. So we choose capital M so that we get this. Now, when we actually write the proof, it'll look something like this, but the
actual style of the proof is a little bit different. And if you didn't see this, it would just seem like I pulled this capital M out of nowhere  But this is the thinking that goes behind it. So let epsilon be positive. Now, I'll tell you how to choose capital M, choose M, a natural number, so that we wanted for all n bigger than or equal to capital M, 1 over n is less than epsilon. So this will certainly be true if n is bigger than or equal to M, capital M, so that 1 over capital M
is less than epsilon.  And the reason we can choose capital M like this, again, where is this coming from, it's coming from the
arcomedy and the property of the real numbers. So we've chosen capital M, now we need to show that this capital M works, then for all n bigger than or equal to capital M, if I look at 1 over n squared plus 30n plus 1, minus 0,  my proposed limit, this is equal to 1 over n squared plus 1, and this is less than or equal to, if I drop n
squared and 1, 30n, which is less than or equal to 1 over n, which is less than or equal to 1 over capital M, which is less than epsilon.  OK, so if something of a non-example, let's show that the sequence minus 1 to the n, the nc does not converge, not Democratic
national committee, does not converge.  minus 1, 1, 1, minus 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, minus 1, and so on. So we have to show it does not converge, meaning for every x in R, we'll show that xn does not converge to x using the negation of the definition.  let x be in R, and what do we want to show minus 1 to the n does not converge to x, and we'll use this definition.  definition means we need to find a bad epsilon 0. And here's the thinking that goes along with this, there's 1, there's minus 1, this sequence just keeps alternating. So intuitively, there's no way that every element of the sequence in the sequence can be getting close to some
single x. So what's the idea? The idea is that the distance between  these two guys is always 2. So somehow, the distance between every entry, or basically some entry, has to be within distance, if this is within distance 1, say to a given x, then this will be greater than or equal to 1 in
distance to x. So you can imagine x is over here,  minus 1 is within distance 1 to x, but then 1 would be greater than
distance 1 to x. So our bad epsilon 0 is going to be 1, as we'll see. Let epsilon 0 not equals 1, that's our bad epsilon. So now we have to show for all capital M, a natural number, there exists a little n bigger than or equal to capital M so that we have that inequality.  let M be a natural number, then what do we see? So then there exist an n greater than or equal to capital M, and I will show that n is in fact, in fact,
either capital M or capital M plus 1,  then 2, which is the distance between minus 1 to the m and minus 1 to the m
1 to the m plus 1 is less than or equal to now using the triangle inequality, I add and subtract x, and then use the triangle inequality  So I have the sum of two numbers is bigger than or equal to 2. And the only way that can happen is if one of these numbers is bigger than or equal to 1. If both of these numbers are less than 1, then the sum is less than 2, and I would have 2 is less than 2, that's not possible.  And therefore, I could take n equal to capital M if this is bigger than or equal to 1, or if this is bigger than or equal to 1, I take a little n
to be capital M plus 1. So that's the end of that.  for examples for now, let's prove a general theorem about
convergent sequences, namely that if I have a convergent sequence, then it's bounded.  a quick reminder of what being bounded
means for a sequence, i.e., there exists some number such that for all n, xn is less than or equal to capital B. Now, as beginning students of math, what types  questions should we start asking ourselves? So one of the types or a type of question that we should ask when we come across a theorem that is a one-way street, meaning if something happens and something
else happens, is does the converse hold. Namely, if I assume x sub n is a bounded sequence, does this imply that xn is convergent?  So if somebody, if you ever hear the words, if you ever hear the words,
does a converse hold, that's what they mean. Now, for this statement, this is false. If xn is bounded, implies xn is convergent, that's false, because we have an example right there of a bounded sequence.  hold. OK, so let's prove the theorem, and let me draw a little picture to go along with it of what's going on. So here's 0, let's imagine, let me make this picture a little bit bigger.  So let x be the limit, so this is not the proof yet, this is just more discussion. So if this x sub n is converging to x, then let's say I go out distance 1 to x, then all of the x sub n's eventually have to
land in this strip here.  so x sub n in bigger than or equal to some capital M. So I know that they're all within distance 1 to x, so in absolute
value, they'd be bounded by, let's say, for this picture, it would be x plus 1, but if this was over there, capital M, it would be the absolute value of x plus 1. So that takes care of all x sub n's with n bigger than or equal to M, and then there's only  maybe guys to deal with, maybe there's a bigger one out here, x of M minus 1 to deal with, and that's how we define our number is by the absolute value of x plus 1, plus the absolute value of these
finity, and then that would be something that's bigger than or equal to every element in the sequence.  We write, how do we take that picture to proof? So suppose xn converges to x, that's our assumption, then there exists a natural number M, such that for all n bigger than or
or equal to capital M  x sub n minus x is within distance 1, or x sub n is within distance 1 to x, then for all n bigger than or
or equal to capital M, if we look at the absolute value of x sub n, add and subtract x, and now use the triangle inequality, this is less than or equal to absolute value of x sub n minus x, plus the absolute value  equals 1 plus x. So for all entries in the sequence, past this point, capital M, they're
bounded in absolute value by 1 plus x, that's just a number. So then we just have to take care of the 1 up to capital M minus 1 guys, which is I have to find a number bigger than those guys, and this number, and we'll have  a b, so then let's take b to be x sub 1 plus x sub 2 plus x sub
calfel M minus 1 plus plus this.  for all n, a natural number, the absolute value of x of n is less than or equal to b. Because if n is less than capital M, then it's absolute value is bounded by one of these, it's absolute value is equal to one of these, and therefore, less than or equal to one of these plus some non-negative numbers, and if n is bigger than or equal to capital M, then we have this
bound that we use.  and this number is certainly less than or equal to capital B again, because it's this number plus
a sum of non-negative numbers.  for a sequence to converge, all we can do is
verify the definition, but there are some sequences which are you can easily check or figure out if they converge just by telling if they're bounded, those are what are called monotone sequences.  a converse of that theorem I stated a minute ago, so a sequence x sub n is
monotone increasing if for all natural numbers little n  x sub n is less than or equal to x sub n plus 1, so this means that x sub 1 is less than or equal to x
of 2 is less than or equal to x sub 3 and so on.  if we have the other inequality, so things are getting smaller, x sub n is bigger
than or equal to x sub n plus 1.  And if we have a sequence which is monotone increasing or monotone decreasing, so it's one or the other, say xn is monotone, or monotonic.  So it's simple enough to come up with examples of sequences which are monotone increasing, monotone decreasing, or neither, so 1 over n, so this is just 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1, 1 1 1, 1 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1,
  take minus this sequence, then I get that reverse is basically all of the
equalities, and I get a monotone increasing 1, so then this is minus 1, minus 1, minus 1, 1 1, 1 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1,  And so the theorem about monotone sequences is that there is a simpler
citerion than the definition for determining when they're convergent, or if you like, they satisfy the converse of this theorem up here.  is convergent if and only if it is bounded. So we proved a minute ago that convergent sequences are bounded. So for monotonic
sequences, the converse holds. So let's do the proof of this, I'm going to do the proof for monotone increasing  and as an exercise, I'll leave it to you to do the proof for
monotone decreasing sequences. So suppose x sub n is a monotone increasing sequence. So there's two directions to prove convergence if and only if bounded, so we have  one direction, meaning convergence implies bounded, this is just a
previous theorem, where we proved that every convergent sequence is bounded, not just monotonic sequences, so the meat is in proving the converse direction, and in fact, we'll be able to pick out what the limit is of this sequence.  suppose x sub n is bounded, then if I look at the set of entries, so not the sequence, but if I look at the set of values that this sequence takes, so x sub n, and this is a natural
number, this is now a set, a subset of
sub set  of the real numbers, this is a bounded set, meaning is bounded above and below, because there exists some capital B so that x sub n is an absolute value
less than or equal to capital B for all n, so that means x sub n  between b and minus b. So let's the picture again, that goes with this, so we have these x sub n's, x sub 2, x sub 3, we know that they cannot go past a certain b, and they're steadily increasing, but they can't  Priests without bound, so not only that, they're bounded by some number x, which I'll define to be the supremum of this set. And these guys are just getting in S, and so this is a picture, let me try to explain to you what's going on.  then what do I know about x sub n? I mean, x is that if I go a little bit to the
left of x, so let me throw this again. So let me back up a minute here. So since this set is bounded in R, it has a supremum in R,  And what I claim is that this supremum is, in fact, the limit of this sequence. This is a supremum of a set, I'm saying it's the limit of the sequence. So what's the thinking here? So x is the supremum of all the entries in x sub n, so nothing's ever going to be bigger than some tolerance x plus epsilon, so we just need to worry about
what's to the left of it.  And we need to find a capital number number M so that all the x sub n's are in this interval here, because we're trying to show that the x sub n's converge to x, the
supremum of this guy.  by this picture, so x is the supremum, nothing's bigger than x, so all of the x sub n's are to the left of x plus epsilon, so now we just need to
were about x minus epsilon. Now, since x is the supremum of this set, x minus epsilon can't be an upper bound for the set of entries of x sub n, so that means there has to exist some x sub n so that it's bigger than x minus epsilon.  But now, this is where we use the fact that this is a monotone
increasing sequence, because then if n is bigger than or equal to capital M, then x sub n is strictly to the right of x sub m, or it's equal to x sub n, and still less than or equal to x because x is the supremum of all the entries. So then for n bigger than or equal to capital M, they all have to lie in this interval, and that's why the sequence converges  to the supremum of this set. So we're using in a crucial way, the fact that this
sequence is monotonic increasing. So to prove this claim, let epsilon be positive, then since x minus epsilon is not an upper bound for this set, x  in, there exists an M0 natural number so that x sub n minus epsilon is less than x sub M0 is less than or equal to x.  for all n bigger than or equal to M, we have x sub n minus epsilon, which is less than x sub M0, and because n is bigger than or
or equal to capital M, and this is a monotone increasing sequence, x sub M0 is less than or equal to x sub n, and because x is a supremum of the set of all entries of this sequence, this is less than or equal to x, which is less than x plus epsilon.  or to summarize so this should not be x sub n, that should be x minus epsilon, or x minus
epsilon is less than x sub n is less than x plus epsilon, and that's the same as showing the absolute value of x sub n minus x is less than epsilon. Now, what's the change for monotone decreasing is that we'll be able to identify the limit of the sequence as being the inf, the inf  this set, but I'll leave that to you as an exercise.  prove the limit of a little bit more interesting
sequence than 1 over this one, which is reasonably interesting, I guess.  So the reason we do things, there's some concrete sequence we're trying to
prove converges or has a certain property or doesn't have a certain property. And the basic one is, if you like, a geometric sequence, if c is a positive number,  between 0 and 1, then we'll prove that this sequence c to the n is convergent, and it converges to 0, and we'll prove if c is bigger than 1,  is unbounded, and particular can't converge. So let's go in reverse order, let's prove that if c is bigger than 1, then this thing is unbounded, it doesn't require 1, but it's shorter than 1, and we can go ahead and do it.  induction. So what does it mean to show something is unbounded? Again, we get to use our negation
skills, it means that, so what do we want to show for all b bigger than or equal to 0, there exists an n, a natural number, so that c to the n is bigger than b  OK, now, how are we going to find this n? This seems like a complicated thing. So let's replace it by something simpler.  simpler things and work with the simpler things. So let me do a little bit of, again, this is off to the side, how would one thing
thing through this, if you look at c to the n, remember we have this inequality from infinite time ago, that as long as x is bigger than or equal to minus 1, then I get 1 plus x to the n is bigger than 1 plus n times x  for all natural numbers n. So that means c to the n, which is equal to 1 plus c minus 1 to the n, so this is my x is
bigger than or equal to 1 plus n times c minus 1, which is bigger than or equal to n times c minus 1,  So if I want to make this big, it suffices to make this big. So that's what I'll do. So let n be a natural number such that n is bigger than b over c minus 1.  then now this we did off to the side, we'll just put in the proof now, and c to the n equals 1 plus 1 minus c to the n is bigger than or equal to 1 plus n times c minus 1, which is bigger than or equal to n times c minus 1, which is bigger than b
over c minus 1,  times c minus 1 equals b. OK, so now let's prove the first claim that if c is between 0 and 1, then the limit as n goes to infinity of c to the n equals 0. So first, I want to prove the following claim that we, in fact, have a decreasing
sequence, which is bounded below by 0.  claim for all n, 0 is less than c to the n is less than c to the n, c to the n plus 1 is less than c to the n. So the proof of this claim is a very simple induction
argument, so we'll do this by induction, so we  of the base case, n equals 1. So we are assuming that c is between 0 and 1, and if I multiply it through by c, I conclude that 0 is less than c squared is less than c, and that's the n equals 1 case.  I mean, it's essentially the same proof, suppose 0 is less than c to the m plus 1 is less than c to the m, then multiplying through by c, we get that 0 is less than c to the m plus 2 is less than c to the m plus 1, which is n equals m plus 1.  this fact here, that c is positive so it doesn't flip the
inequality, so I can multiply through and preserve the inequalities. So this shows that this sequence is monotone decreasing and it's bounded below by 0, and in fact bounded,  because c to the n in absolute value, these are all positive, it's equal to c to the n, and c to the n is less than c to the n minus 1, which is less than c to the n minus 2, which is less than c.  to this inequality and prove that as well, but that's OK. So it has a limit, so by the previous theorem, as a limit and I'll call it L, and now what I want to show is that L is 0.  And how we'll do that is one of these analysis tricks where, not really,
tricks, but rather than show L is directly equal to 0, we'll show that the absolute value of L is less than epsilon for every epsilon positive, and therefore, it has to be 0, because it's just a fixed number.  that the absolute value of L, which is just a fixed number, is less than
epsilon, and therefore, capital L has to be 0, then there exists, since this sequence converges, an M, a natural number, such that for all n bigger than or equal to capital M, c to the n minus L  minus c times epsilon over 2. Now, maybe you're wondering why I just use epsilon here, well, in the end, it's just going to come out to this being less than epsilon in absolute value,
otherwise, I would have come out with less than epsilon times number, and I did away with that number by choosing a
number here.  Note that if I look at 1 minus c times the absolute value of L, this is equal to L minus c times L, and this is less than or equal to L minus c to the capital M plus plus c to the M plus 1 minus c to the L  and by the triangle inequality, this is less than or equal to L minus c to the m plus 1 plus c to the
n plus 1 minus c to the L so I can pull out a c, which is positive, so I can get L. Now, m plus 1 is bigger than m, so it satisfies this inequality, and so does this one.  epsilon over 2 times 1 minus c plus c times epsilon over 2 times 1 minus c. And this is less than, so c is less than 1, so this
this whole thing is less than epsilon over 2 times 1 minus c plus another epsilon over 2, so I get epsilon over 2 times 1 minus c.  the absolute value of L is less than epsilon. And since epsilon was arbitrary, that implies the absolute value of L is equal to 0, i.e. L is equal to 0.  I think the only real reason one proofs theorem is you typically have a concrete
example of something in mind that you want to study, but in order to study it, it often requires some general machinery, i.e., theorems.  So now we'll talk a little bit about sequences obtained from other sequences. So these are called subsequences, or sequences obtained from a single sequence.  So we started off with a sequence and an increasing
sequence of integers, n sub k,  So let me just say what this means, rather than write out the word and
then say what it means. So this is the sequence of natural numbers, which are strictly increasing, n sub 1 is less than n sub 2, is less than n sub 3, and so on.  the new sequence, x sub n sub k, so now the index is not n, but the index is k, is called a subsequence.  of the original sequence x sub n. So how should you view subsequences of a sequence you should think that I line up all the
entries of my original sequence x sub n? And then I just start picking entries out of the sequence, so, but every time I make a choice, I have  move to the right and make another choice. What I was just saying there, it's just saying there, it's this
condition that this sequence of natural numbers is increasing. So I pick an entry in the sequence, that's going to be my first guy, the first element of my new subsequence, and then I move to the right, and maybe I pick the next one, maybe I pick one 3 down, I pick that one, and then I move to the right of that one, and pick a new one,  And then I move to the right of that one and pick another one. So if you want to generate a
subsequence from an original sequence, how do you think about this, again, line them all up, start picking entries, but every time you pick an entry, you have to move to the right and pick in order to pick your next entry.  is 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, and so on, what would be examples of some subsequences, the odd numbers, 1, 3, 5, 7, 9, and so on, you see how I'm taking the original sequence, so this is x sub n, I'm just picking entries from the original
sequence, but every time I pick an entry, I move to the right  and pick a new one. So pick 1, now I get to choose anything to the right of that. I pick 3, now I have to choose, I can choose anything to the right of that. So in the language of this definition, the
increasing sequence of integers is just the odd integer, so 2k minus 1. So here, x sub n is equal to just n.  the sequence of even numbers 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, this is a subsequence of this
orational sequence here, the increasing sequence of integers is 2k.  13, and the increasing, so I don't have a general
formula for that, good luck finding one, but we'll just write this as k-th prime number.  So these are examples of subsequences, not examples of subsequences would be, for example, the
sequence 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1. This is not a subsequence of this original sequence. Remember, I have a sequence of natural numbers, which is increasing, and x sub n sub k means that this new sequence is obtained from the old one by picking entries  by picking an entry, moving to the right, picking the next entry, moving to the right, and picking the next entry. Here, in order to get this sequence from this one, I just stay on the first entry and
keep picking it, but that's not how a subsequences defined. So here, if you like, this would mean n sub k is equal to 1, and this is not a strictly increasing  or 1, 1, 1, 3, 3, 3, 5, 5, 5, and so on, that's also not. So these are not subsequences of the original sequence given here.  Now, I'm not saying, I want to emphasize this, I'm not saying that the number you pick each time has to be different from the number you pick before, meaning the value.  1 entry, you have to pick an entry and move to the next entry or 1 after that and pick that entry to obtain your sequence. But that doesn't necessarily mean that those actual numbers in those entries have to be different.  is equal to minus 1 to the n, then a perfectly good
subsequence is given by minus 1, minus 1, minus 1, minus 1, minus 1, minus 1, where, so it looks like I'm just picking one of the entries, but really I'm not here, the increasing sequence. So what I'm doing here to get this new sequence, I pick the first entry, then I pick the third, then I pick the fifth, then I pick the seventh, so n sub k equals 2k minus  1. So all the actual numbers appearing in the
sequence are the same, but I'm actually picking different entries from the original sequence, where they appear.  of the original sequence, these are subsequences of this sequence.  So all right, so from a given sequence, we obtained a new, we can obtain new sequences from this original sequence in this way. So a natural question is to ask, how does going from a sequence to a subsequence  not react, but behave with respect to limits. If the original sequence
converges to a limit, does a subsequence or does every subsequence converge to that limit as well? And this shouldn't come as a surprise that it does, because all of the elements of the sequence of the sequence are getting close, all the entries of the sequence are getting close to a given number, and a subsequence is just if you like picking certain
1's along the way, so certainly  if I'm in a subsequence then, as long as I'm far enough out in the
subsequence, I'll be close to that limit as well.  a sequence which converges to x, and x sub n sub k is a subsequence of x sub n,  the subsequence converges to x as well, limit as k goes to infinity of x sub n
sub k equals x.  So let me just start off by making a simple observation, based on the fact that this
increasing sequence that the n sub k's are an increasing sequence of natural numbers, since n sub 1 is bigger than or equal to 1 is less than n sub 2 is less than n sub 3,  this implies that for all k, natural number, n sub k is bigger than or equal to k. So this is not so hard to believe because n sub 1 has to be at least bigger than 1, n sub 2 has to be at least
bigger than n sub 1, so it's either n sub 1 plus 1 plus 1 or bigger, and therefore, by a simple induction argument, which I'll leave to you, you can prove that for all  a natural number, n sub k is bigger than or equal to k, induct on k. So we want to prove that this
sequence converges to x, and we're going to do that using the only means we have, so this is just some arbitrary subsequence of x sub n, all we have is the definition to use.  blah, blah, blah, blah. So the first thing we have to do is let epsilon be positive,
now we'll use the fact that x sub n converges to x, sub x sub n converges to x, there exists a natural number, M0, such that for all n bigger than or equal to M0,  x sub n minus x, absolute value is less than epsilon. This M sub 0 we'll choose for our subsequence, choose M to equal M sub 0. So now we need to show that this capital M works for our subsequence, meaning if k is bigger than or equal to capital M, then x sub n sub k minus x is an absolute
value, less than epsilon, but this just follows from this fact.  So, then if k is bigger than or equal to M, this implies by this inequality, n sub k is bigger than or equal to M, which remember is equal to M sub 0. So n sub k is some integer, so natural number bigger than or equal to M sub 0. So that implies by this inequality, that x sub n sub k minus x in
x and absolute value is less than epsilon.  OK?