 So, all right, so let's start talking about some math. So there was a last result I was going to prove for series, which is that if you have an
absolute convergent series, and you rearrange it,  that series is also absolutely convergent and converges to the same thing as the unarranged series, but I'm going to leave that to the lecture notes and
we're just going to start on a new topic.  So continuous functions, as we'll see, is a statement about how a function behaves near a point in relation to how it behaves at the point. Now, what it means for a function to be a near a point, that's the notion of the limit of a function, which is what we'll first discuss.  Now, at what points are we going to be looking at? So this is where limits take place, and somehow we want to look at a function near a point, near points where there's a lot of a set nearby to actually look at f at.  a lot of S nearby, and we kind of already dealt with these types of points when we encountered cluster
points in the assignment. So this is exactly where we start looking at limits. So this is a definition that I'll recall from the assignment, S be a subset of R, and x and R,  let me say x is a cluster point of S if for all delta positive, the interval x minus delta, x plus delta intersect S take away x is non-empty.  terminology, not so new, since we dealt with it in the
assignment is a bad of a cluster point. Another way to say this is that, so an equivalent way of stating this is that for all delta positive, there exists, let's say, a y in S such that 0 is bigger than x minus y is less than delta.  So what this means is that, as far as a picture goes, x is a cluster point, if, when I ever
take any small interval about it, I can find some S in there other than possibly x.  to look at some examples, let's say we take S to be 1 over n in a natural number. And so, since now I actually have people in front of me, I can actually ask questions.  So whoever first says it, what would be a cluster point of this set S? So what would be a point in the real numbers so that there's a lot of S near it? Feel free to blur it out if it comes to you.  We're just take a guess. 1, so that's 1 possibility. So there has to be a lot of S near this proposed cluster point. So let me mark out the points that we have.  5, 6, so on, and so on, and so on. And so I see a guess of 0, so that's a good guess as well. So why would 1 maybe not be a cluster point? Well, it's because if I draw a little interval around 1, then there's only 1 point in S in here, and it's the proposed cluster point 1. So remember, what we should be able to do is find, in every
small interval,  some of S in the interval that's not equal to the point, and we can't do that for the point 1, but for 0, if we draw any interval around 0, there's plenty of S in the interval not equal to 0.  And let's give a quick proof of this. So we have to verify for every delta positive, this
interval 0, minus delta, 0 plus delta intersect S takeaway 0 is non-empty. So the delta B positive, and now here's the picture, here's 0, here's delta,  minus delta, we have to show that there's some S in here, so we simply choose a natural number n large enough so that 1 over n is there, and we can always do this because of the
arcomedy and property of the real numbers.  is less than delta, and it's certainly bigger than 0, so n is a natural number, then 1 over n is n
x minus delta, x plus delta intersect S takeaway 0, so this shouldn't have been 0.  on empty, because it has something in it. OK, was that example OK? Did you all get that all right? So feel free to ask questions as they come up. So let's do another example.  I give a proof of, we'll proof of, but we'll just kind of talk our way through it. Let's say S is now the open
interval 0, 1, what is the set of cluster points of 0, 1 equal 2?  So what would be a reasonable guess, or any guess? So yeah, so certainly this will contain 0, 1.  So if I draw this 0, 1, and of everything in between 0, 1 is certainly a cluster point. What about the point 1? Is that a cluster point of this set?  that's a good observation that, yeah, it's the sup of this set.  So for every delta positive, if I draw a little interval around 1, there's going to be a number less than 1, that's bigger than 1 minus delta.  let's do another example, let's say we look at now, set of rational numbers, so you should, again, think of cluster points as being the set of points where there is a lot of this set nearby. Now, what is the set of cluster points of the
rational numbers?  So perhaps it will contain the irrational number, so let's think about this for a little bit.  in there that's not equal to square root of 2. Right, because we have this theorem about the
density of the rational numbers, right, that we have. So remember that this was a theorem we proved at one point for all x, y real numbers with x less than y, there exists an rational number R, such that x is less than R  So we can always find a rational number here, or we could have taken another
rational number here. So for every interval we draw around square root of 2, we can find a rational n there, not equal to square root of 2, obviously, but we can find a rational n at interval.  are those also cluster points, let's say I take 0, now I look at a small
interval around 0, can I find a rational number in there other than 0?  by this theorem, right? You can also use a theorem to find a rational in this interval as well. So no matter if it's square root of 2 or any irrational number, no matter if it's a rational number, everything is a cluster point, so the set of cluster points of
rational numbers is equal to R.  OK, feel free to stop me if you have any questions. Now, let's look at, for example, S equal to just a single guy, say 0.  by. Now, I claim that this guy has no cluster points, because if you think, so intuitively, why is this? This is because, for some to be a cluster point, it has to have a lot of the set near it, a lot, and there's not a lot of set to begin with, there's just one element.  And this gives us a chance to negate the definition of cluster point, which is always a good idea.  if there's some bad delta, remember, so the definition of cluster point is a for all delta, so negation means there exists
1 bad delta, so that x minus delta 0, x plus delta 0 intersect S take away x equals the empty set.  that there's some interval and possibly the only S there is the point x, but nothing else.  want to show x is in R, and x is not a cluster point of S. And I'll just do the case x not equal to 0, x equal to 0 is
much easier, so we'll just do x not equal to 0.  And let's prove this, and what's the idea, we have to be able to find, so here's 0, this is all that S is just this point 0, now we have a point x, what would be an interval containing x that
contains n of S.  So x here is just a sum non-zero number, S is what's highlighted to be interval around x that doesn't contain any S.  3x over 2, meaning delta equals x over 2, at least for this picture,
that's essentially the proof. Choose delta 0 and we'll simplify this further and suppose x is positive.  to be x over 2, then x minus delta, 0, x plus delta 0 is equal to x
over 2, 3x over 2, since 0 is not in this set, and in this set implies  intersect S takeaway x equals empty. So we had to find a delta so that this interval around x doesn't
contain anything from S, and we've done that by choosing delta 0 to be x over 2.  OK, so I could have done it for just, so I did it for just one, so for a set containing just one element, showed that this set has no cluster points, you can also show that if it has, if it has, finitely, many points, it has no cluster points.  but being a cluster point has nothing to do with a
cardinality. So if you see the example in the nodes which you can think about, and I'm not going to go over right here, but for example, S equals z, the set of integers, this has no cluster points.  So being a cluster point means where is the set clustering? So it has nothing necessarily to do with the
size of the set, but where the set is taking up space in the real number line.  in the assignment, which is that for cluster points, let S be a subset of R, and x is a cluster point of S, if and only if there  xn, the elements of S takeaway x, such that xn converges to x. And that was in the assignment, you proved that, basically,
using the squeeze in the definition.  start talking about how a function behaves near a point, which is the notion of a limit of a function,
is our next definition, the S be a subset of R, and even though I was referring to cluster points earlier as x, we're now going to switch over to c, c, c  a cluster point of S, let f be a function from S to R. So you say f of x converges to L as x goes to c, so this is a new
  analogy here. So here, L is a real number if, for every epsilon positive, there
exists delta positive such that if x is in S, absolute value of x minus c is bigger than 0, less than delta,  f of x minus L is less than epsilon. So let's try and compare this definition a little bit to what happens for a sequence. So for a sequence, the sequence is getting close to L as long as we go far enough out in the sequence, as long as we look at terms far enough out. Now, for limits of functions, that going far enough out
along the sequence is  by, as long as we look close enough close enough to the point c, but not at the point c. So, like this says that if x is near c, so this is just an intuitive
interpretation of what this definition says, if x is near c, then f of x is near L.  And let me also throw in here that we're saying that x is near c, but not equal to c. For a limit, you don't look at what happens at f of c. The function doesn't even need to be defined there to be able to define what a limit is, we just care about what happens nearby.  is that here's c, and maybe f is not even defined up to there, but there's f, the graph of the function f there, and as long as I get very close to c, I'll be very close to L.  very close being measured within some strip here.  typically, right, like we did with sequences, f of x converges to L as f of x arrow L, and then
I'll write as x goes to c, maybe I won't write as x goes to c, and we note this by limit of f of x equals L as well.  is are the unique, and this is, in fact, why we require that c be a cluster point of S, because if we didn't require c to be a cluster point of S in this definition, limits would not be unique.  at one point, we're going to use the fact that c is a cluster point to prove the
following theorem, so c be a cluster point, S, which is a subset of R, and let f be a function from S to R,  If f of x converges to L1 is x goes to c and f of x converges to L2 as x goes to c, then L1 equals L2. So this is what I mean by uniqueness, that a function can only have one limit as it approaches a point c.  let me get the proof. So we're going to play this game again, where instead of showing something is 0 or something is equal to something
something else directly, we'll give ourselves a little room and prove the following, we'll instead show that for all epsilon positive, L1 minus L2 is less than epsilon. L1 and L2, these are just two fixed real numbers if they're absolute value  is less than epsilon for arbitrary epsilon, then this is a number which is smaller than any positive real number that implies that
numbers that number is 0, so L1 equals L2. Why we give ourselves a little room is because, in the definition, we have a small parameter there, which we hope to use.  So since f of x converges to L1, so just from the definition, given some small tolerance, I can find a little number delta so that if I look inside this interval, I get mapped to the
interval L plus epsilon L minus  And so there exists a delta 1 positive, such that if x is in S, and I'm going to probably keep for getting to write that, but that should be understood that x is in the domain of the function f, if x minus c is less than delta 1 and bigger than 0, then f of x minus 1,  is less than epsilon over 2. And then the same thing for L2, I mean, if f of x is converging to L2, then there exists a delta 2 so that I have the same statement.  and here, i equals 1, 2. So since f of x converges to each of these two numbers, L1 and L2, there exists a delta 1 and a delta 2, so that if I'm within this
tolerance, delta 1 or delta 2, then f of x minus delta 1, L1 or L2 is less than epsilon over 2.  Now, since c is a cluster point of S, there in fact, there does exist an x in S, such that 0 is bigger than x minus c is less than delta. And I'm going to use this x to compare L1 and L2.  then since x is in this interval, or I should say, since it's, remember I have this, which means I have this inequality for I equals 1, 2, I get f of x, I should say, L1 minus L2, this is equal to, if I  and subtract f of x, and now use the triangle inequality, and use the inequality that's in green, the f of x minus L1 is less than
less than epsilon over 2, and same for L2, I get  equals epsilon, and that's the n because remember we started off with the
absolute value of L1 minus L2.  not the most exciting theorem in the world that this thing that we've defined, limit is a unique thing for a function, but let's start looking at some examples.  let's suppose, so let's look at the limit as x goes to c of the function ax plus b, and I claim this is equal to ac plus b.  So we have to verify this definition, and since it's for every epsilon, there exists something, the beginning of every proof, I'll give you a few points if you can just say let epsilon be positive.  an M arguments for sequences. So what are we after? We want to find delta so that x minus c less than delta and also bigger than 0 implies f of x, which is ax plus b minus ac plus b is less than epsilon.  let's start off with this thing, play with it, and see if we can find how to choose delta. Remember, we don't solve this inequality, we want to find how to choose
delta based on estimating this thing and trying to make it less than epsilon.  b, this equals a times x minus c, which equals absolute value of a times x minus c. And now we're in business because the thing that we do have control over is the delta, right, is how big x minus c is. So this is less than absolute value of a times delta if x minus c is less than delta. And remember, the thing that we want  the end is the thing in yellow and the thing we get to control is the thing in green. So if I want the thing in yellow and I have the thing in green, how do I choose delta?  So in the end, I want f of x minus ac plus b to be less than epsilon. Right now, I'm at the absolute value of a times delta, delta is the thing I get to play with.  right, because if I choose delta this way, then x minus c less than delta
implies that just by this computation here, I would get epsilon in the end.  Choose based on epsilon, and so you look at f of x minus ac plus b, you estimate it to be no bigger than the absolute value of a times x minus c, which is less than the absolute value of a times delta. And so if you want that thing to be less than epsilon, you should choose, for example, delta to be epsilon over the absolute value of a. There's not a unique choice, I could have chosen
delta to be epsilon over 2, absolute value of a,  but this is a choice. So let epsilon be positive, choose delta to be epsilon over absolute value of a.  the best parts of your computation, and f of x minus a times c plus b, this is equal to absolute
value of a times x minus c. So if we take f of x and subtract our proposed limit, ac plus b, we get the absolute value of a times absolute value of x minus c, which is less than the absolute value of a times delta, which equals epsilon, since we chose delta to be epsilon  all right, that's the proof. Is there any questions?  OK, so let's do another example. Let's look at the limit as x goes to c of the function square root of x, and I'm going to show this is equal to square root of c.  a closed interval, 0, infinity, and infinity, not
including infinity, of course, and for what I'm going to do c is positive. You can also do c equal to 0, but for this proof, I'm going to do c positive.  over to our box of square-bling and scratching. So remember, our goal is to find a delta, which I can choose, so that f of x minus square root of c in this case is less than epsilon.  from your days and calculus that when every you see the difference
of two square roots, it's a good idea maybe to multiply the top and bottom, or I guess multiply by 1 in a very special way, so that I get the difference of square. So this is equal to the square root of x minus square root of c times square root of x plus square root of c, all over square root of x plus square root of c  And so now I have, on the top, I have product a minus b times a plus b, so that's the
different sub squares, which gives me x minus c on top over square root of x plus square root of c. And remember, this is less than the thing that we're going to choose in the n, the absolute value  of x minus c is less than delta, so this is less than square root of x plus square root of c. Now, in the end, you can choose
delta depending only on epsilon and maybe the point c. You cannot choose it to be dependent on the point x, which is changing.  times epsilon, don't do that, because delta, again, only depends on the point c and the point epsilon, it cannot
depend on the thing that's changing, which is x, this is changing. So you don't make this choice. Now, if we just do one more thing, then we'll get to something where we can choose an independent of the thing that's changing x,  the square root of x on the bottom is only making things smaller,
because that's non-negative. So this is less than or equal to delta over square root of c. So now, in the end, I have something which is delta and it depends on the point c. So I want f of x minus square root of c to be less than epsilon, so how should I choose delta?  Shout it if you know it.  So choose delta to be epsilon times square root of c. Now we have to show this delta works, which is essentially, again, just rehashing our computation over on the right, which gave us how to choose delta, then if the value of x minus c is less than delta,  f of x minus square root of c, and I'm not going to write f of x,
and I'm going to write square root of x, is equal to, basically, what we did over here in the box,  the absolute value of x minus c over square root of x plus
square root of c, which is less than or equal to, if I take away the square root of x on the bottom, like we did before, which is less than delta, square root of c, which equals epsilon square root of c over square root of c, which equals epsilon,  Is there any questions about that example?  function is doing near a point, but not at the point, so let's say we look at the
function f of x, given by 1 if x equals 0 and 2, if x does not equal 0. So this is 0, and for x not equal to 0 is equal to 2,  and at x equals 0, it's equal to 1. And claim that the limit as x goes to 0 of f of x, this equals 2. And the thing to note is that this limit does not equal f of 0, which  did for the previous two cases, if we look back at these two examples that we did a minute ago, the limit as x goes to c of both of these
examples was I just plug in c to the function.  point, f of x is just equal to 2, identically. So I'll give you the quick proof, or you can
completely ignore it and just believe that the limit as x goes to 0 of this function equals 2. So the point is, is that for x not equal to 0, f of x is just a constant 2, so let epsilon be positive, and you can choose  delta to be whatever you like, because f of x when x is not equal to 0 is going to be equal to 2, the proposed limit, then if 0 is bigger than the absolute
value of x minus 0, which is just x is less than delta, then this implies x is not equal to 0. And therefore, if I look at f of x minus 2, this is just 2 minus 2 equals 0, which is less than epsilon  OK, any questions about this example?  So what we'll talk about now is, so before this section on continuous functions, or at least this section on the limits of functions, we have the notion of
limits of sequences, and so on,  natural question is, how do limits of functions and limits of sequences belong together, interact, relate to each other, I guess, is the best way to
prease that question. And the point is, is that to decide if a function has a limit, it suffices to stick in sequences that converge to that point that you're looking at, and that's the content of the next  So let S be a subset of R, c plus or point of S, let f be a function from S to R.  the limit as x goes to c of f of x equals a number L, this is equivalent to the statement that for every sequence x sub n of elements of S take away c, such that xn
converges to c,  We have f of xn converges to L. So again, the statement of this
theorem is that a function converges to L if and only if for every sequence I stick into the function, which converges to c, f of xn converges to L. So it does choose or to decide if a function converges, it suffices to look at c  convergence of certain sequences. And why is this theorem important, or at least very useful? Because with this theorem, we now get basically every analog of theorems we proved for sequences for free, for example,
for example, limits of sums of functions,  a squeeze theorem that can be stated for limits, a function, and so on, and I'll say a few
some comments about this after we proved the theorem.  So first, assume that limit as x goes to c of f of x equals L. And now we want to prove the
statement in green. So here's the idea, so now we want to show that xn, the sequence of elements  an S takeaway c such that x sub n converges to c. And what we want to show is that f of xn, which is now a new sequence, converges to L, as n goes to infinity.  n goes to infinity, and here, so let me move that, and let me draw the picture of y, you should believe this. So remember, what it means for a sequence to converge to a number means for every epsilon, there exists a capital M, so that for all n bigger than or
or equal to capital M, the sequence is,  close to the number L within epsilon distance to it. So let's think about this a little bit, I'm not going to draw the graph, I'm just going to draw two
copies of the number line, here we have number L, here's the number c, and L plus epsilon, or minus epsilon,  that epsilon be positive, and the idea is we want to be able to find, or say there exists a natural number capital M
so that n bigger than or equal to capital M implies f of xn is inside this interval here. Now, since f of x converges to L, as x converges to c, there exists a delta  so that this is a picture that goes along with it, so that if I'm inside this interval here, then I get mapped into this interval here.  capital M is so that all of the x sub n's, y in this interval c minus delta c plus delta c plus delta, and if I can arrange that, which I can, because the x sub n's
converge to c, then I will get that these guys get mapped into this interval L plus epsilon, L minus epsilon, and that's the whole idea of the proof, now we just need to write it down.  since f of x converges to L, there exists a delta positive, such that if less than delta, then f of x minus L is less than epsilon, that's what I drew in yellow there.  the sequence x sub n equals c, this implies that there exists a natural number, M sub 0, such that all n bigger than or equal to M sub 0, and since all of these x sub n's are not equal to c by assumption, they're in the set S take away c, x sub n minus c, and
n minus c, and absolute value is bigger than 0,  and less than delta. This follows from the definition of
convergence of sequences to a point here, if you like, I'm choosing epsilon in that definition to be delta, and this delta is coming from the definition for convergence of functions.  And if n is bigger than or equal to M, I get that by our choice of it being M sub 0, get that x sub n minus c is less than delta, that means that it
falls in this little yellow, highlighted part in the first number line, which implies, so here what I'm using  is what's highlighted in blue, so this is content of this
implication implies that f of xn minus L is less than epsilon. And that's what we wanted to do. We wanted to show that there exists some natural number M so that n bigger than or equal to M implies f of xn minus L is less than epsilon  And therefore, we've proved that the limit as n goes to infinity of this
sequence f of x n equals L. So that's one direction of this if and only a statement, let's prove the opposite direction.  And this proof is going to be by contradiction. So let's suppose that our assumption, what's in green holds, but the limit as x goes to c of f of x does not equal L. Now we're going to do the proof by contradiction, meaning suppose the outcome is false.  OK, we're still assuming what's in green holds, that's our assumption. And for a proof by contradiction, we assume that the outcome or the conclusion as false, which is that the limit as x goes to c of f of x is not equal L. Now, what does this mean? So now we get to negate the definition  get better acquainted with it, this means that the definition of limit, if you go back to the notes, is for all epsilon, there exists a delta statement. So the negation is that there exists some bad epsilon, epsilon 0, such that for all delta positive,  there exists an x such that x is close to c, but is far, f of x is far away from L. So the negation of the definition of limit of something being the limit is that there exists a bad epsilon so that no
matter how close I get to c,  I can find something very close to c that's far away from L
if I stick it into f. That's the intuitive way of viewing the negation of this definition.  this says, so this statement here is a for all delta statement, so it holds for every delta I pick, so for all n, a natural number, there exists an x sub n, such that 0 is bigger than x sub n minus c is less than delta, I'm going to pick
to be 1 over n,  and f of x sub n minus L is bigger than or equal to epsilon 0. So first off, I made a for all n statement, let's think about this for just a second. So certainly for delta equals 1, I can find a number x sub 1 satisfying 0 is less than x minus c is less than 1, and f of x minus f of x sub 1
minus L is bigger than or equal to epsilon  0, but delta can be anything I choose, so for delta equal 1, I can find x sub 2, such that x sub 2 minus c is less than 1, 1, 1,
half, and f of x minus L is bigger than or equal to epsilon 0. So I'm just choosing delta to be 1 over n for each n, a natural number,  OK, is this point clear? Please stop me if you have questions, and something is not clear. OK, so I have this sequence of elements of S that are not equal to c, because they're an absolute value
of the absolute value of x sub n minus c  is bigger than 0, and they satisfy these two inequalities. Then let me just write this inequality again. So then the inequality that I have is for all n, the natural number 0 is less than x sub n minus c is
less than 1 over n.  that the x sub n's must then converge to c, what tool can I use to say that? Please, theorem, because this thing on the left, 0, if you like, is a sequence, just a constant sequence, this converges to 0, and 1 over n, something on the right
converges to 0 as n goes to infinity,  So that implies the thing that's sandwiched in between, it squeeze to 0. So that implies the limit as n goes to infinity of x
n minus c equals 0, i.e., xn's converge to c. Now, I'm assuming what's in green holds, which is if I take any sequence converging to c, f of xn has to converge to L.  what's in green is given me this implication, 0 must be equal to limit as n goes to infinity of
f of x of n minus L. But what I know is that since I've assumed f of x does not converge to L, along the sequence, each of these guys is bigger than or equal to epsilon 0, which is positive,  So now I've concluded that 0 is bigger than 0, and that's a contradiction. OK, so next time we'll talk about the applications of this theorem, do you have any questions about this proof or anything that we've covered so far today?  I mean, how you get the choice of delta from doing it?  Yeah, I mean, so probably in most classes, you would just be given this proof that's over here on the left, and somehow it looks like magic that I chose this
delta this way and it ends up working.  But the thinking that goes in behind it is, so what's the thing you want? You want what's in yellow? So let me erase some of what's in yellow.  plus B, and start computing, and when you compute it, you get what we got here in the second bit of yellow, and we're assuming that the absolute value of x minus c is less than delta. We're trying to choose delta so that what's in green implies what's in yellow. So far, we haven't chosen delta, we just know that the absolute value of x minus c will be less than delta, and we want to choose delta  that implies what's in yellow after the arrow there. So when we do this computation, in assuming that the absolute value of x minus c is less than delta, we get this thing right here, the absolute value of a times delta.  what we'll be assuming. So and we want what's in yellow, which is that thing to be less than epsilon. So what we've arrived at is this thing here, which we want less than epsilon, is less than this thing in red. And therefore, we want to choose the delta so that the thing in red is less than epsilon or less than or equal to epsilon, that will ensure that f of x minus ac plus b in absolute
value will be less than epsilon.  So I'm not solving an inequality, I'm not solving the inequality I want, which is f of x minus ac plus b, I'm starting with what's on the left, estimating it, using my assumptions, and then at the n choosing delta so that I come up with epsilon in the end. So in the last step, I have absolute value of a times delta, and I want that to be less than epsilon, so I could have chosen delta to be less than epsilon over  less than or equal to epsilon over a. So anything, any delta like that would have worked. So I could have put delta to be epsilon over 2a, that's
still would have worked, or 3a, OK?  or do we get to use in this common mutation? Are there any other questions?  this is a style thing, all right? So throughout this entire semester, for all epsilon, you have to be able to find M so that
something happens.  M to be something, maybe it's the maximum of some M0, M1 that you had or choose M to be so that 1 over M is less than epsilon or something like that. So I'm just sticking with that style of saying choose M to be this. Otherwise, I could have said there exists a capital number M so that for all n bigger than or equal to capital M, x sub n minus c is less than delta.  and then move to the next part. But throughout the course, I've always, at least in the proofs I've presented, you're making a choice of capital M. For all epsilon, there exists a capital M. So that means you have to tell me how to choose capital M. And this is the same thing with these epsilon delta proofs is that for all epsilon, there exists a delta. So at some point, you have to tell me how to choose delta in the proof.  of saying choose M to be something. Although you're absolutely right that I could have just said for all n bigger than or equal to capital M0, I have what I want, and
therefore, implicitly, I'm saying that M equals M0 is the thing that works.  Yeah, that's the same delta. Yeah, that's the same delta.