 So let's continue with our discussion of the derivative.  which we denote by f of c, this is the limit as x goes to c of f of x minus f of c
over x minus c. Last time, we look at the relationship between continuity and differentiability and show that differentiability implies continuity  is quite a miraculous thing because there are continuous functions, which we actually
constructed, we constructed a continuous function, you can generalize that example, so we constructed a continuous function that is differentiable nowhere.  just as a side note, if you go on to study a complex
analysis, which are functions of a complex variable, rather than a real variable, you also have a notion of a derivative there, and then the derivative is much more miraculous than it is here in the setting of R, but the whole point as the derivative is something of a miracle.  the goal is to prove some properties about the derivatives, most of these you know, maybe you didn't
cover the proofs of them in calculus with the ultimate goal of proving the mean value theorem, which is, to me, probably the most underappreciated, but most important result in calculus,  could argue that probably the hero of the story of calculus is the fundamental
theorem of calculus which connects integration, which we'll cover next after differentiation, which the fundamental theorem of calculus connects integration and differentiation.  So if the fundamental theorem of calculus was Batman, I would say the mean value
theorem is something like Alfred, he's really the reason why Batman gets to be who he is.  the basic linearity and rules for the derivative, so that f go from i to R, I is always some interval,  y, and the conclusion is if f and g are differentiable at c, then we have several rules that we can apply the first is,  of the derivative that for all alpha and R, a function alpha f plus g, which
now goes from i to R, is differentiable at c, and the derivative of the function alpha f plus g,  is alpha times f prime of c plus g prime of c, OK? I'm going to start right a little
slanded here. Second is the multiplication rule, which is the function f times g  is differentiable at c and the derivative of the product is not the product of the derivatives, but the prime of c, g of c plus f of c, g prime of c.  And just like when you need to divide by something, you need to assume that you're never dividing by 0, if g of x to the 0, not equal 0 for all x in I, then the function f over g  is differentiable at c, and the derivative of the top times the bottom minus the top times the
derivative of the bottom over the bottom square  not prime g of c squared. So I'll prove 1 and 2, 3 will leave as an exercise.  for one, we just compute that the limit as x goes to c of alpha f plus g of x minus alpha
f plus g of c over x minus c, this is just by definition alpha times f of x plus g of x minus alpha times f of c plus g of x,  as x goes to c in just collecting terms, alpha times f of x minus f of c, x
minus c plus g of x minus g of c over x minus c, and all of these limits exist, so this is just a fixed number, the limit as x  goes to c of this exists, and this exists, so by what we know about limits, namely that the limit of the sum is a sum of the
limits, and then the scalars just pull out of the limit, this is equal to alpha times f prime of c plus g prime of c. So that's the proof of the first one.  which is a differentiable at a point, is also
continuous at a point. So, such g is differentiable at c, it is continuous at c, i.e., limit as x goes to c of g of x equals g of c,  Now, we compute limit as x goes to c of f times g of x minus f of c times g of c, over x minus c. Now, what I'm going to do is add and subtract f of c times g of x. So this I can write as the limit as x goes to c of f of x  minus f of c over x minus c times g of x plus plus, now f of c times g of x minus g of c over x minus c. And again, so this limit as x goes to c  S, this is just the derivative of f at c, and we noted that since g is
differentiable at c, g is also continuous at c, meaning the limit as x goes to c of g of x equals g of c, this is just a constant, f of c, this goes to g prime of c. So all these limits exist, and therefore, we get that this is equal to f prime of c times g of c plus f of c, g prime of c.  B I'll leave as an exercise. Again, you'll write out, you'll add and subtract something to f of x over g of x minus f of c over g of c, and use the fact that we have that differentiability at a point implies continuity and just
value it at the limit.  I don't know why I called it the multiplication rule, it's called the product rule, well, multiplication and product, same thing.  suppose I have two intervals, and then I have a function g going from I1 to I2, f going from I2 to R, and suppose g is
  differenceable at c, and f is differentiable at g of c. Then the function f of g, which now goes from I1 to R, this is
differentiable  of l at c and the derivative equals f prime of g of c times g prime of c.  So what's the basic basic idea, again, so this is basic idea is that we write a
difference quotient  g of x minus f of g of c over x minus c as f of g of x minus g of c
of c times x over g of c times x minus c  and let x go to c, and then we'll pick up the derivative of g here at c, and right here, this is f of something
converging to g of c, and so this should be like f prime of g of c. But the only problem with really writing this down is that there could be points where g of x equals g of c, and then I'm dividing by 0, that's not allowed.  something like this in spirit, where at least when g of x does not equal g of c, this thing equals this thing.  and a few auxiliary functions, so first off, the function we're
interested in taking the derivative f of g, let me call that h of x, because I don't want to have to keep writing f of g of x, let's call d, this will be the point g of c.  then that h prime of c exists and it's equal to f prime of d times g
prime of c, just in this notation I've set up. So now let me define some auxiliary functions, u of y. This is going to be essentially the difference quotient of f, except  certain point, so this is f of y minus f of d over y minus d, when y does not equal d, so that this is
meaningful, and then f prime of d when y equals d. And then, this is going to play the role of that first expression I wrote up there, f of g of x minus f of g of c,  And then, and then, and then, v of x, this will be g of x minus g of c, x minus c, when x
does not equal c, and g prime of c when x equals c. Now, essentially, what?  what do we have here? Then if I look at f of y minus f of d, this is equal to y times y minus d, always.  that's equal to u of y by definition. And then when y equals d, I get 0 here and
I get 0 over here, so that's clear. And also, the same here, g of x minus g of c equals b of x minus x minus c, all right?  expressions, and one more thing I want to note is that you and
b are continuous at y equals d and x equals c respectively.  let's look at the proof of that, we just need to show that the limit as y goes to d of
y equals d, so the compute the limit as y goes to d of y, now when we look at limits, remember, we're not allowed to put y equals d in the expression for this limit.  y is near d and not equal to d, b of y is given by, I should, this is, should be
you here, sorry, you, OK? So we're looking at y near d, but not equal to d, and therefore, it's given by this expression. So this is the limit as y goes to d of f of y minus f of d over y minus d  And this is just the definition of the definition of the
derivative of f at d. So remember, d is g of c, so f is differentiable there, and this is, by definition, u of d. So this function u is continuous at y equals d, and similarly, the limit as x goes to c of x,  equals b of c, which is g prime of c. So now we're going to combine whatever it in here to
finish the proof.  this is equal to f of g of x minus f of g of c, and this is equal to u of g of x times g of x minus g of c.  so this is by star, and now I use the second
relation, double star, to write g of x minus g of c equals b of x times x minus c. And therefore, the limit as x goes  to c of h of x minus h of c over x minus c, this is equal to the limit as x goes to c of g of x times b of x.  composition of two continuous functions is continuous. So this equals
u of g of c and b of x we've proven already, that limit is b of c. And so this is d. Remember, in the notation we had earlier, and therefore, that equals f prime of g of c, remember g  c was d times g prime of c. So to go from this point to this point, we use the fact that u is continuous at c, which we proved,
u is continuous at g of c, which we proved over there, and that g is continuous at c, and therefore, the composition of two continuous functions  is continuous at that point to arrive at this guy. But again, the whole basic idea was to be able to write the
difference quotient as a product of what looks like the difference quotient of f times the difference quotient of g, but you have to be careful because g of x could equal g of c, in which case, you're dividing by 0 in this basic idea we had up there, which is not allowed.  by using these functions, which equal what you want, as long as you're not
dividing by 0, basically. So that wraps it up for basic properties of the derivative, and now we're going to move on  trying to prove the mean value theorem, the alpha of this bad man tail, but first, in order to prove this, we'll need a
result about  the derivative in relation to a certain relative minimum and
relative maximum, so let me first define what this means, let S be a subset of R, f be a function from S to R, we say f as a relative max  at c in S, if there exists a delta positive, such that for all x in S, x minus c is less than delta, then f of x is less than or equal to f of c.  state that there's analogous definition of
relative min at c. You just take this entire definition and flip the inequality. That's the definition for relative min. So what this means, pictorially, so remember, we had this notion of absolute min and absolute  an absolute max at a point c means every other point at every other point in S, f of x lies below f of c.  let's say our function looks something like that.  the value of the function at this point for all x in this
interval a, b, and then here at this point, we would have an absolute min, because the graph of the function sits above that point for all x in this interval.  say, this would be a relative max, because why if I look at an interval, small interval around it, and I look inside this interval, there's
tomany-dot-dash lines going on, so I'm going to erase this,  I'm just going to do away with the dash. If I zoom in on just this one piece of the graph, then at this point, the graph sits below this point inside this little vertical strip.  maybe it's a, let me, so you can really see what graph is, should have brought different colors, at this point, we have a relative min, because nearby point
sit above the value of the function evaluated at this point,  So relative max means nearby points, f sits below that f evaluated at that point and
relevant to min is the other way around. So I don't think we need to belabor the point of what relative min, relative maxes are, I think that's pretty clear.  OK, so the theorem is the following, if f from a, b has a relative min or max at a point  c strictly inside this closed interval, in the open
interval a, b, then f is differentiable at c, then f prime of c equals 0. And this is kind of clear from this picture, although this kind of might look more like a sawtooth,  that the tangent at this point is horizontal, and the tangent at this point is
horizontal, which is the expression that, which is just expressing that f prime of c equals 0, so f prime of c is supposed to be the slope of the tangent.  and we'll do it for relative max, relative
min you get by taking minus f. So we'll do it for, suppose f as a relative max at c and a, b,  So I'm just going to draw a picture to illustrate why this is a k, so or why what I'm about to say is a k, so we have a, b, c, then there exists delta positive, say delta 1, such that two things are true.  x or c minus delta 1 plus delta 1 is contained in a, b, 2 for all x and c minus delta 1, c plus delta 1, f of x is less than or equal to f of c.  delta 1 is chosen as the minimum of, so maybe let me not call it delta, let me 1, let me just
call it delta. So first off, you know that a, b, open interval, this is an open set, which we've encountered in the assignments, so you can find a delta so  delta 0 say, so that this interval centered at c is
contained in a, b. Now, since f has a relative maximum at this point, there exists another delta 1 say, so that if I'm inside that interval, then f of x is less than or equal  f of c for all x in that interval, and I choose delta to be the minimum of
the minimum of these two delta's, and then I will have chosen delta so that c minus delta c plus delta  And then delta 0 shows them so that that is contained. So I choose the minimum of these
delta's, and this is the delta I take for this statement.  the fact that we have a relative max to show that the
derivative is bigger than or equal to 0 and less than or equal to 0.  then what do we know, xn, the limit as n goes to infinity of c minus delta
over 2n converges to c. So the derivative at c is equal to the limit as n goes to infinity of f of x sub n minus f  over x sub n minus c. Now, what do we note? So x sub n is in this interval here, which is
contained in this interval here, and therefore, f of x sub n is always less than or equal to f of c. So what's on top is always less than or equal to 0. Now, x sub n is always less than c, so this thing on bottom is also less than 0  0, and therefore, something that's less than or equal to 0 on top over something
that's less than 0 on bottom must be bigger than or equal to 0. So that's approaching c from the left. If we approach c from the right delta over 2n, which is contained in c c plus delta,  for all n, then xn converges to c, and we look at f prime of c, again, this is equal to limit as n goes to infinity of f of y sub n minus f of c over y sub n minus c. Again, f of c is a relative
relevant maximum, so this thing on top is still less than or equal to 0  And the thing on bottom though, is now since y sub n is bigger than c, this is positive. So something on top is negative, something on top is positive, so the limit
must be negative. So we've just shown f prime of c is both bigger than or equal to 0, and that it's also less than or equal to 0,  and therefore, the derivative is 0 at this point.  get this is less than or equal to 0, this one would be bigger than or equal to 0. But you still get f prime of c is bounded
between 0 and 0. So at a point where we have a relative minimum, strictly inside the interval, the derivative must be 0.  And the fact that it happens strictly inside the interval is important, this is not
necessarily true if the relative max or relative min happens at an endpoint. Think of f of x equals x on 0, 1, and it has a absolute minimum at 0, absolute max, 1, and the derivative is 1 at both points, not 0.  that the functions defined on and where it's differentiable. OK, so now we have roles theorem, which is essentially the mean
value theorem rotated, we'll get the mean value theorem from roles theorem, which states the following,  f of f b from a, b to R, b continuous, so it's continuous at every point in a, b,
differentiable at every point inside of a, b, it could be differentiable at the end point,  but it has to be different on the open
interval a, b of f of b, a equals f of b equals f of b equals 0, then there exists a point c, the open interval a, b, and this is important, such that f prime of c equals 0.  what's the picture that goes with this, I'm sure you've
seated before, let me draw a function, I looks kind of like sine or cosine, but anyways, a function which is 0 here, 0 here, 0 here, then there has to exist point where the tangent is vertical.  can occur at two different points, but something that's already giving the game away as far as how we'll
prove this is, let's look at where the function takes a maximum and a minimum.  So I guess I didn't say this over there when I
discussed relative min and relative max, but an absolute maximum is also a relative maximum, and absolute minimum is also a relative minimum.  absolute max is n is a relative max, absolute min's is a relative min.  max and a min, and why does f take a max or a min? It's because f is continuous on this closed and bounded interval. This is something we proved when we were
discussing continuity, the min-max theorem.  on a, b, f achieves a relative max at some point c1, and a, b, and a, b, and a, b.  OK, if there exists x, well, so if f of f of c1 is positive, then what can you say? Well, c1 cannot be one of the endpoints, because at the endpoints, f of a equals f of b equals 0.  this implies c1 is in the open interval a, b, which implies by the previous
theorem, f prime of c1 equals 0. So here you c equals c1. If I'm at the minimum now, and this is less than 0, then, again,  this implies that c2 is in the open interval a, b, which implies since f has a minimum
at c2, f prime of c2 equals 0 by the previous theorem, and therefore, we could take c equals c2.  positive or f of c2 is less than 0, then we have the result. If f of c1 is less than or equal to 0 is less than or equal to f of c2, now remember, f achieves a max at c1, f achieves a min at c2, and therefore, this should always be less than or equal to this.  if the max and the min, so first off, I make sure I'm getting my
logic correct here,  So rather than state it this way, let's do it like this.  So in terms of the picture here, this would be c1, c2, where we achieve a max in a min, OK, then in the final case that f of c1 and
  then, so this is the max, 0 is equal to f evaluated at a point,  So let me go back to what I was going to say a minute ago. So in the last case that f of c1 is less than or equal to 0 is less than f of c2, now remember, this is the min, this is the max of f.  above f of c2, so that implies that f of c1 equals f of c2, and therefore, the max and
min equal each other, which implies for all x and a, b, since f of c1 is the minimum, or f of c  c2 is the, so I started off with something here, there, an in between, which implies for all x and a, b, f of x equals f of c2, so that means f is constant.  And we know what the derivative of a constant function is, is just 0. So we could take, say, the midpoint, and that's the end.  0 at the end points, there has to be a point in between where the
function is the derivative of the function equals 0. Now, again, we should come back to when we see a theorem, we should pick it apart a part a little bit to see what's necessary, what's not.  function is continuous and
differentiable on this open interval a, b, are these necessary.  get the function 1 minus the absolute value of x, so at minus 1, 1, 1, 1, this is a continuous function on minus 1, 1, 1, and f of minus 1  1 equals f of 1 equals 0, but there is no point where f
prime of c equals 0. What hypothesis did I leave out for this function? The fact that the hypothesis that it's different at every point in between, this function's not differentiable, but there's no point where the derivative  0. So this example tells you that the hypothesis that the function is
differentiable on the interval minus 1, 1 or a, b is necessary for the theorem to be true.  that the function is continuous on the closed
interval is also necessary. Let's say I look at, and this is pretty easy to come up with a counter example, if I don't assume that,  let's take the function which is, the function that's x minus 1 for x not equal to minus 1, and
0 for x equal to minus 1, so  what does this function look like? So this function here is differentiable on minus 1, 1, f of minus 1 equals f of 1 equals 0.  c in minus 1, 1, so that f prime of c equals 0, because the derivative in between minus 1, 1, 1 is just 1. So both of these hypotheses that f is continuous on the closed interval and
differentiable on the open interval are necessary for this theorem to be true. If you drop either of those of those hypotheses, then the theorem is false.  So let's rotate this picture here and arrive at the mean value theorem.  that f from a, b to R, the continuous, so it's continuous
on the closed interval, a, b, differentiable on a, b, then there exists a c, and the open interval  be such set, f prime of c, let it this way, f of b minus f of a, times b minus a.  is a kind of rotated picture of a and shifted kind of
version of roles theorem, so there's a, b, there's f of a, f of b, and let's say that's how the function looks. Now, the slope of the line connecting f of b to f of a is exactly f of b minus f  So the slope of that line is f of b minus f of a, and what we're stating is that there's a point c so that the tangent at that point is parallel to that line, has the same slope as the line
connecting f of b to f of a,  So this theorem really does reduce two roles theorem.  and we'll give us what we want, basically. So g of x equals f of x minus f of b plus f of b minus f of a over b minus a times b minus x. Basically, what this function g does  as it takes the function now and rotates it and shifts it down so that these two points then coincide and
give you 0.  and this is just a constant, that's just a constant, this is a polynomial, so g's
continuous on a, b, and differentiable on a, b, again, because f is, right? f is differentiable on the open interval a, b, this part is differentiable everywhere, so the sum of two differentiable functions is  is differentiable on a, b. So continuous on a, b, and
differentiable on a, b, since I said we're going to use role's theorem, let's compute g of a, this is equal to f of a minus f of b plus f of b minus f of a over b minus a times  b minus a, that cancels with that, minus f of b, cancels with f of b, f of a,
cansels with minus f of a, and we get 0. And then g of b, this is even easier to c if I just stick this in, this is f of b, minus f of b, plus f of b, minus f of a, over b minus a, b minus b, and this also equals 0.  So g of a and g of b are 0, the function is continuous on the closed
interval, it's differentiable on the open interval, and therefore, my role's theorem, I think there's supposed to be some sort of x n over 0, but I can't remember, and I've forgotten it already.  0 is equal to g prime of c, which is equal to, if we take g and actually compute what the derivative
is at c is equal to f prime of c, that's a constant derivative of that is 0, this times this, the derivative of x evaluated at c, just gives me minus f of b,  times b minus a, and that's it. 0 is equal to f prime of c minus what we want, we move that to the other side, multiply it
through by b minus a and we're done.  OK, so first, very nice applications of the mean value theorem, which you've
learn from calculus for the following.  Let f from i to R be differentiable, meaning it's differentiable at every point in the interval I, then we have two
conclusions, f is increasing,  meaning let me recall what that means for f to be increasing, that means that if x is less than y, this implies f of x is less than or equal to f of y, this is equivalent to for all x and I,  f prime of x is bigger than or equal to 0, so remember, f is the rate of change, if the rate of
changes is always non-negative, then f has to be growing, this says f is decreasing, meaning x, S and y implies f of x is bigger than or equal to f of y, this is equivalent to, since a function is increasing  if and only if minus f is decreasing, this
inequality should flip. So I'm going to do increasing, decreasing, decreasing follows from number 1 by taking minus f  So, I'm going to do a f, and still have time. So suppose first that f prime of x is always non-negative,  let a, b, b, n, i, and b, excuse me. We now want to show f of a is less than or equal to f of b, then f is continuous,  on this smaller interval a, b, why? Because f is differentiable at every
point in I, and therefore, it is continuous at every point in I, so in particular, on this smaller interval  in a, b, so by the mean value theorem, such that f of b minus f of a equals f prime of c times b minus a. And now, since the derivative is always non-negative, and b minus a is positive, this is bigger than or
or equal to 0, i.e., f of b  minus f of a is bigger than or equal to 0. So we've proven one direction. We've proven that if you like that the function's derivative being non-negative implies that the function is increasing. So now let's prove the opposite direction.  So suppose f is increasing, and c is nI, let xn be a sequence  and I such that xn converges to c, and one of two things holds, and either, say, a, for all n, xn is less than c, or b,  for all n, xn is bigger than c. And we can always find such a sequence, given a point c in the interval
I. So if I, so let's say it's a closed interval, and c is in here, then we can find a sequence xn converging to c, approaching c from the left,  If c is one of the end points, then we can find a sequence from I
approaching c from the right, that's b, and the same thing if c is over here, we can find a sequence approaching c strictly from the left.  And this is because I is an interval.  that f prime, then we get that f of xn is less than or equal to f of c for all n. And let me, in fact, write this a little bit differently.  which implies for all n, f of xn minus f of c over x sub n minus c, now this thing on top is negative, xn is less than c, so this thing on the bottom is also negative, and therefore, this thing is positive,
non-negative, I mean,  And therefore, the limit must also be non-negative. But that limit is just a
diremitative evaluated at c. And kb is kind of similar, not kind of it is.  I'll n, f of xn, now since xn's to the right of c, this way, this minus f of c is bigger than or equal to 0, which implies that f prime of c, which is the limit as n goes to infinity of f of xn minus f of c over xn  to c, what's on top is non-negative, and what's on bottom is non-negative
because xn is bigger than c. So bigger than 0, bigger than 0, bigger than 0, bigger than 0. So in either k, so in either case, we get that f prime of c is bigger than or equal to 0.  proven that the derivative is always non-negative. So that's 1 and 2, f is decreasing if and only if the function minus f is increasing, which by what we've done from part 1,  minus f prime of x is bigger than or equal to 0 for all x and I, and then multiplying
through by minus by this minus 1, gives me number 2. And so let me make one last, I know it's taboo to write on the back part, but I'm going to do it anyway,  we have the very simple theorem, which now follows, which
follows, let f from i to R be differentiable, then f is constant. So f of x equals f of y for all x and y and i, if and only  the derivative is identically 0. So f is constant, if and only if f is both increasing  because it satisfies the equality sign in both of those. And by what we've done now, for all this means for all x and I, f prime of x is bigger than or equal to 0, and that's for the increasing part, f prime of x is less than or equal to 0.  f prime of x, this is equivalent to f prime of x equals 0.