 Differentiable as many times as you like, and the derivative  at 0 equals 0 for all n. So what do I bring this up? Because then the Taylor polynomial for this function that I've written here, at 0, so this is the Taylor polynomial at 0, just equals, again, the sum of the
dereveratives evaluated  at 0 times x minus 0 to the k, but all the derivatives are 0, and thus, the function is in fact equal to the remainder term near 0. So you see, the remainder term
term, it carries all of f, so it doesn't necessarily need to be small. And what I'm trying to say is that, in general, you  throw away this remainder term and expect that to be even near the point x, some sort of faithful representation of the function just by the
taller polynomial, because as we see for this function, the tailor polynomial is identically 0. If I throw away the remainder term, I would be saying f is 0, but it most certainly is not near x equals 0.  that discussion. So now let's give the proof. And as you see, we're just going to kind of apply the mean
value theorem repeatedly to higher derivatives of f, but not necessarily of f, but of a function we  So let's take two points x0 and x not equal to each other. Of course, if they're equal to each other, we can take c to be whatever we want, because then what we pick up is f of x equals f of x on the right-hand side. So we can just consider the case that x0 does not equal x.  depending on x and f0 over x minus x0 to the n plus 1. So p sub n, this is, again, the Taylor polynomial of
degree n, f of x minus p sub n of x over x minus x sub 0. So this is just a number, depending on x and x0,  just rewriting this, this means that f of x is equal to p sub n of x, the Taylor polynomial
of n at x plus m x times m x x x 0 times x minus x sub 0 over n to the n plus 1. So now the goal is to show that, in fact, this number can be written as the n plus 1 derivative evaluated at some point over n plus 1 factorial  So now the goal, show there exists a c and a, b, such that m x equals f n plus 1 over c over n plus 1 factorial.  OK, so now, what is this defining characteristic of this Taylor polynomial
at this n-th-order Taylor polynomial value with respect to x0?  up to n-th order, up to n derivatives, in other words, if I take the k-th derivative of f and
evaluated at x0, this is the same as taking the k-th derivative of the Taylor polynomial and evaluating it at x0. So the Taylor polynomial agrees with f up to n derivatives at the point x0.  whole point of Taylor polynomials is that they at least at the point agree with f up to 1, 1,
up to 1, 1, 1, 1, and so on, it doesn't mean they agree with f or even are a good representation of f away from x0, like we just saw, but at least at x0, they're agree with f.  find a new function, which I'm going to start up
applying the mean value theorem to, and hopefully come up with this c, it's g of s equals f of s minus p sub n of s minus this number from earlier times s minus x0 to the n plus 1.  function here, so this whole function, so g, first off, f is n plus 1 times
differentiable, this is a polynomial, so it's n plus 1 times differentiable, and this is just a polynomial, also, in S, so it's n plus 1 times  So let me draw a picture. So we have x0 and x, at least in the picture x is bigger than x0, but that doesn't really matter.  Now, when I stick in x0 here, I get 0, so and now f of x0 minus pn of x0, again, by this first thing
here, for k equals 0, this is equal to 0. And now, what do I know about g evaluated at x?  the variable that I'm changing, or at least the free variable there is S, so if I stick in x, I get f of x minus pn of x minus m, this constant from earlier, which I chose, depending on x and x
0, but using this relation here, this is 0.  at x0 and at x is 0. So by the mean value theorem or
role's theorem, so by mean value theorem, there exists a point x1 between x0, x such that g prime of x1 equals 0.  Now, remember, at g prime of x1 equals 0, now at x0, we have that, so at g prime of x1, so at x1, g prime is 0, but also, if I look at the derivative of g at x0,  this is equal to f prime of x0 minus pn, prime of x0 minus, now here, I'm working
again under the, so just for illustration purposes, I'm assuming n is bigger than 2, bigger than or equal to 2, at least from what I'm writing down right now.  get f prime of x0 minus pn prime of x0, so this equals 0. So I have g prime of x1 equals 0, g prime of x0 equals 0, and therefore, by the mean value
value theorem, again, there exists a point x2,  between x and x0 such that the second derivative of g evaluated
at x2 equals 0. And now I just iterate this, because I still know at x0, the second derivative of g is also 0 as long as n is bigger than or equal  bigger than or equal to 2, and then I'll get that there's x1 here. So let me write here, at this point, we know g equals 0, g prime equals 0, and so on, at this point, g prime equals 0, and then at x2, so then the fact that g  here at this point is 0, and at 0 here, we apply the mean value
theorem again, and we get a point x3 in between them, where now the third derivative equals 0, and we can keep going on up until a certain point. And what point is that? That's when I've taken away n derivatives here, and all that I have left here is S minus x0.  Continuing in this way, we see there exists, we see for all k between 0 and n, there exists an x sub k
between  x0 and x such that the k-th derivative at x sub k equals 0.  x0, x and x is x sub n. So I'm just now going to repeat this argument one last time, and we'll see where that leads us, since g, the n-th derivative of g evaluated at x of 0 equals 0,
equal to 0, again, this is coming from this relation here,  So let me, in fact, write that again, this is equal to f of x0 minus pn of x0, and I'll even write out, this is equal to mx, x0, n plus 1 factorial times x0 minus x0, this is what happens when I take n  of n s of this monomial here, so this, of course, is 0 equals 0.  there exists, by the mean value theorem, now
applied to g sub n, g, the n-th derivative of g. So when I write mean value theorem here, I'm not applying it to the function g, I'm applying it to the derivative.  Now, applying the mean value theorem to the
inth derivative of g, so let me make that perfectly clear, there exists a number c between x and x0 such that the n plus 1  the derivative of g, the derivative of the
inth-order derivative of g, so the n plus first derivative of g, c equals 0. But what does this mean? Now, if I take n plus 1 derivatives with respect to S of this over here,  Now, if I take n plus 1
derivatives of an n-th degree polynomial, I get 0. If I take two derivatives of a degree 1 polynomial, which is just x, I get 0. If I take three derivatives of a degree 2 polynomial, I get 0.  M to this constant, again, times n plus 1
plus 1 derivatives of this monomial here in S, so remember all these derivatives I'm writing down here, these are all in terms of S, times n plus 1 factorial, and this equals 0.  Yeah, and this should be c, I'm sorry, it's for plugging in c. But that means precisely that which is what I wanted to show, exist it.  constant from earlier, which remember was defined in this way, is
actually equal to the n plus 1 derivative of f evaluated at some c, so and therefore, f of x is equal to pn of x plus c times c  where c is between x and x0. So again, the Taylor's theorem says a couple of things, but it doesn't say certain things.  point in between so that the second line from f of b to f of a is equal to the derivative of the
function tangent to the graph at some point in between, but it doesn't tell you that the function near a point can necessarily, what am I trying to say?  So what Taylor's theorem does say is that you can iterate the mean value
theorem for higher-order derivatives. What it doesn't say is that this polynomial that you get over here, which you interpret as an approximation of the function f near x0, it doesn't say that that approximation is necessarily good.  higher function, but still that still, that still doesn't make it any less useful in applications.  let's give a simple application of Taylor's theorem, which perhaps you had endless homework
problems or examples  the exam problems on, when you first are calculus and we're finding
critical points and trying to characterize them as relative minimums or maximums, we have the second derivative test, which  is to continuous derivatives on this open interval a, b, if at a point in a, b, the derivative
equal to 0,  and the second derivative of f of evaluated at x sub 0 is positive, then f has a
relative min at x0. And I should say that this is a  strict relative min, what's the difference between a strict relative min and just a
relative min, a strict relative min, I mean that if I'm at any point other than x0 and I'm nearby, then f of x is bigger than f of x0.  near x0, in fact, let's just briefly recall what the definition of
relative min is, and this will allow me to state what it means  that strict relative min, this means there exists a delta positive
positive such that for all x n  such that for all x, x minus x0, x minus x0, f of x is bigger than f of x0.  a strict relative min, a strict relative min is a relative min because what's the only thing missing from the definition of
relative min is what happens if I evaluated x0 and then at x0, we get f of x0 equals f of x0, so a strict relative min is a relative min.  meaning this thing is bigger than 0, f of x is bigger than f of x
0, not bigger than or equal to. So I hate doing this, but the theorem stated over there, and now we need to go across the room to do the proof.  So, f has two continuous derivatives on a, b, and therefore, the second
drivenative is continuous at x0. So since the second derivative is continuous, we get that the limit as x goes to x0, or instead of x, c, this equals f  a prime of x0, which is positive, by assumption, that's what we're assuming. And therefore, by an exercise in one of the
assignments, since this limit, this implies that there exists  a delta 0 positive, such that for all 0 bigger than
c bigger than x0, and in fact, we can include,  let me see, there exists a delta 0, positive
zero positive such that for all c satisfying, we get that f prime of c is positive. So all I'm saying is we have this point x0, x  0 plus delta 0, x0 minus delta 0, and then on this interval, f
double prime of c is positive. You proved that, in fact, in an assignment, if the limit of a function as I approach a point equals L, which is positive, then near the point, the function has to be positive.  So now I have to verify that what am I trying to do? I'm trying to verify that I have a strict
relative minimum so that there exists a delta, I have this delta 0, which ensures that the second derivative is positive on this interval.  in that satisfying that inequality, I have f of x is bigger than f of x0, so take an x between delta within delta distance to x0,  OK, then by Taylor's theorem, there exists a c between x and x0, so here's x, there's this point c between x and x0, which I can always choose strictly  between them such that I have that f of x equals f of x0 plus f prime of x0 times c minus x0 plus, no, this should be x, plus f
of c over 2 times  x minus x0 squared, now at the function at x0, the derivative is
assume to be 0, right? We're assuming the derivative vanishes at x0 and the second derivative is positive there, so this equals f of x0 plus f of c over 2 times x minus x minus x0 squared  Now, on this whole interval, which is where I'm looking at, f
double prime of c is positive, so this thing here is positive, and as long as x minus x0 is not 0, as long as x is not equal to x0, this thing is positive, this is a square, so this is strictly bigger than f of x0, which is what I wanted to prove.  I have proven that f of x is bigger than f of x0 on this interval here. So of course, the picture that goes along with this is something like, let's say the point x0 is 0, at least near this point, the
driving of a 0,  second derivative is positive, so this is how the function should look. So that concludes what we're going to say about differentiation. I have put in the assignment, the most useful
version of Lopitales rule, which is the only other main thing we're missing right now from just the theory of differentiation  But remember, it kind of differentiation is a bit of a miracle, as I've said before, because there exists continuous functions that never have a
decorributive integration, which is what we're moving onto now, is not so much  circle, because as we'll show, every continuous
function has a Riemann integral, which is a different limiting process. So all of these things we're talking about, all of these notions, continuity is a notion that involves limits,  a process involving limits, and the
integration is a process involving limits, but somehow integration is not as harsh or process as differentiation.  I should say the Riemann integral, but I'll say, right, Riemann integration. And so what is Riemann integration?  it means, or this is a number that we associate to a function, that you interpret as the
area underneath the curve. It is not as maybe you're told somehow magically equal to the area underneath the curve. There is no notion of area underneath the curve, the remon integral,  is a number which you interpret as the area underneath the curve, because it agrees with what you think the
area underneath the curve should be, for example, examples, for example, a half circle or just a box. These two notions agree, and therefore, you interpret the remanon interval, which is a number obtained by a limit process as the area underneath the curve.  and the Riemann integral magically coincides with that notion.  integration, it's fantastic in being able to, and it's ease of computing, hopefully at some point you go on to
learn about the big integration, which is a much more versatile notion of area underneath the curve, and a little bit more robust, you have better theorems that you can then use and prove  then use, of course, but Riemann integration is a place to start, and in fact, in some treatments of the
leabague integration, the Riemann integration is treated as a completion of Riemann integration just as the real numbers are the completion in some sense of the rational numbers.  some definitions and notions that we'll need, so I'm just going to be talking about the
remon integration of continuous functions, this is the simplest way to go, why not for some general functions or something like that, because in general, a function does not have a remon integral, so you could try to ask, can you characterize what functions do have a remon integral, and the answer to that  functions which are continuous in a
sense, almost everywhere, almost everywhere, though you don't have the machinery to describe that, that's a measure theory course.  the Riemann integral for continuous functions, which is nice and simple enough, and
still pretty. So let me just introduce first some notation that I'll be using a lot c of a, b, this is going to be the set of all continuous functions from a, b to R, so f, maybe to R,  is continuous. Now, so, as I said, that we're going to associate to an interval and a function, a number, which we will
letterrider interpret as,  as a notion of area underneath the curve, so this process is a limitative
process where we're going to be taking the domain and cutting it up into smaller and smaller pieces and somehow writing down a number that we think approximates the area is a good, approximate area underneath the curve.  to this breaking down process, the partition of the interval a, b, this is just a finite set, x underline, which I'll write in this way, is a finite set,  which I write x0, x1, x2 up to xn with the property that x0 is equal to a, is less than x1,
less than x2, OK?  these two vertical lines on either side of x
underline is, by definition, the max of the difference is between these partition points. So I refer to these points that are in the partition as partitioned as partition points, so this is x1 minus x0, so on xn minus xn minus 1,  tag for partition x, x bar is finite set, xc, so get used to some Greek letters in your
life, xc equals c1 up to xn. So as before, in the partition, we started off with a 0, here we start off 1, such  each of these x c's lie between partition points, in other words, x0 is less than xc, 1 is less than x1, x1,  is referred to as a tagged partition. Although maybe it looks a little bit fancy, it's not a partition is you take your interval a, b, and you cut it up in the pieces with your first point,
always being a, and your last point always being b,  x1, x2, and because I can't draw n points, I'm going to draw 4 points, x3, x4.  little intervals that I've broken up the bigger interval interval n2, and the xc's are just points in each of these little
interval. So c1 has to land there, xc2 could land in the next one, it could actually be the endpoint if we like, xc3, let's say it's the midpoint, xc4 is there as well,  So the tagged points are just lying in these smaller intervals. And at least in this picture, the biggest
separation between partition points would be something like x3 minus x2 here. So the norm of a partition  the length of the largest sub interval. So I drew something abstract here, let's make this more concrete, let's say I'm looking at, so just to write down  few examples, let's say my interval is 1, 3, and then my partition is
or the points 1, 3 halves, 2, 3, and then my set of tags  5, 4, it's just the midpoint, 7, 4, 5, 1, 1, so my partition is 1, there's 2, 3, 1, so those are my partition points, and meanwhile, my tags are the midpoint.  And then the norm of this partition is the maximum of the lengths of these smaller subintervals here, not the ones using c, but the one with the partition point.  and is the length of this subinterval.  OK, so now, given a tag partition, we're going to associate a number to this tag partition, which we interpret as an approximate area.  let f be a continuous function, x c, a tagged partition, the Riemann sum,  I should say, of f, associated to the tag partition xc is the number, S sub f of x
barr, I mean, x underline, x c underline, which is the sum  from k equals 0 to k equals 1 to n of f of xck times xk minus xk minus 1. So again, what we interpret this number, so how do we interpret this number?  Now, we give meaning to this number as an approximate
area, if this is a, b, and there's a function f, and those are the partition points, so x1, x2, x3, so x4, x0, and let's say,  the tag are just the right endpoints of each of these smaller
intervals, then what is this number, at least in terms of this picture, that's a little off,  So what I've shaded in this area, this equals this sum of f associated to this tag here, and let me go over, again,
the graph of f.  So this number here, which we've come up with, we interpret as somehow being an
proximate area, again, I don't like saying area underneath the curve because that presupposes that there is a notion of the area underneath the curve independent of what we're doing here, but that's not the case, we are, in fact, giving a  the area underneath the curve, we are prescribing a number which we
interprets as an area underneath the curve. So these Riemann sums, we interpret as being a approximate area. And so what we would like to do is somehow take a limit as the lengths of these subintervals get smaller and smaller, as the norm of the partitions go to 0.  at these approximate areas, these are just numbers converge to some
limiting number, a, say, that number we refer to the Riemann interval of f, and we interpret as the area underneath the graph of f. Now, for this to work, we have to show that as we take partitions with smaller and smaller norm,  the intervals get smaller and smaller and smaller, these approximate
areas actually do converge to some number, and that's going to be the content of the next lecture, in which we'll prove the existence of the remanon interval, and do some properties about.  out there in the universe, there's a notion of the area underneath the curve, and when we compute the
remot integral, magically, those two things, those two numbers coincide.  ordinary geometry, and therefore, it gives a good
theory of area underneath the curve. But in order for us to construct that theory, or how we're constructing that theory is, for a continuous function, we define a number associated to a partition, which we interpret as approximate areas, we would like to say these approximate areas converge to some number as  the partitions get finer and finer, or as the norm gets smaller and smaller, and that limiting number we interpret
interpreterp it as the area underneath the curve. And so that'll be what we do next time is actually show the existence of this limiting number, which is the remodeled interval of f, and we'll stop there.  you