 So last time we proved the following theorem, that if I have a convergent series,  then this implies that the limit as n goes to infinity of x sub n equals 0. So a natural question is, as a beginning, advanced math class, does the converse hold?  if the individual terms in this series converges to 0, does this imply that the series converges? And I'm sure you answered this question in some form in a previous calculus class, and the answer to this question is no.  What's the counter example, it's a so-called harmonic
series, which corresponds to our favorite sequence which converges to 0. So we'll state this as a theorem.  converge. So how are we going to prove this theorem? We'll prove this theorem by showing a sequence of partial sums, a subsequence of partial sums for this guy does not converge. So if it were to converge, then the sequence of partial sums converges, and therefore, every
subsequence of partial sums converge,  So what's the strategy we're going to show that there exists a subsequence of partial sums, so here, Snk,  So let's make this mk. So remember the partial sums are simply summing up the first, so the index
series m sub k, so the first m sub k terms, 1 over n, diverges. And this is enough to show that the full series doesn't converge again, because if it did converge, the partial sums, the  of partial sums converges, and therefore, every subsequence of partial sums converges. So if we're able to show there exists a subsequence, which diverges, then we're done. In fact, what we're going to do is something a little bit stronger, we're going to show that there
exists a subsequence of partial sums, which not only diverges, but is unbounded, and therefore, the entire sequence of partial sums is unbounded.  So if we're able to show there exists a subsequence which is unbounded, then the entire
sequence of partial sums is unbounded so it can't converge, because remember, convergent sequences imply bounded sequences.  And for some reason, I switched indices from k to L in my note, so instead, we're going to go from M sub L. So let L be a natural number, and we'll
consider the
sub n  partial sum corresponding to adding up the first 2 to the L terms, OK? Now, you may ask why 2 to the L, why not 3 to the L? 4 to the L will be a subsequence of that. 2 to the L is you could do 3 to the L, you could do 5 to the L, but 2 to the L
seems is a sufficient for our purposes.  So what we're going to do is we're going to take this partial sum and bound it from below by something which is quite large. So first off, all of these partial sums are bounded from below by 0, right?  1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1,  and then plus, so, dot, dot, dot, dot, 2 to the l minus 1 plus 1 plus 1 plus 1 over 2 to the l. Now, I can write this partial sum. So I've grouped terms this way, what is this in terms of
precise  symbols, this is 1 plus sum from lambda equals 1 to L, sum from n equals 2 to the lambda
minus 1 plus 1, 2 to the lambda 1 over n. So these lambdas are now parameterizing what power of 2 on that, so when lambda equals 1, I'm at this block,  1 lambda equals 2, I'm at this block, and lambda equals l
on this block, and then I'm summing up the term set have denominator between that power and the next of 2.  that this subsequence of partial sums is unbounded. So I bound it from below by sum from lambda equals 1 to L, sum from n equals 2 to the lambda minus 1 plus 1, 2 to the lambda. And now, for each of these, n is between  2 to the, so this should be 2 to the lambda. Now, for n between these two numbers, n is 1 over n is always bigger than or equal to when I plug in the biggest
bound here, 2 to the lambda.  n, but there's no n in this term, so I just add up all the number of terms in a given block, and this is equal to, so first I have 1 over 2 to the lambda
come from here, and then sum from n equals 2 to the lambda minus 1 plus 1, 2 to the lambda times 1, so again, I'm going a little slow here,  L 1 over 2 to the lambda times the number of terms I have here, which is 2 to the lambda minus 2 to the lambda minus 1 plus 1, so this minus this plus 1.  lambda equals 1 to l, 1 over 2 lambda, and then so this 1 cancels with this one, and then I have 2 to the lambda
minus 1, which I can bring out, so this is just 1, and I get 1 plus sum from lambda equals 1 to l, and this 2 to the lambda cancels with this 2 to the lambda, and I'm left with just  And this is big, and this is equal to, now there's no sum here in lambda, so this is just 1 plus L over 2.  by 1 1, that's this term that we get right here in the end, and we can see this if we just go through the first three terms, which I have
written here. So 1 1 1, 1 1, is clearly bounded below by 1, 1 third plus 1, 1 1, 1 1, 1, and 1 1, 1, and 1, 1,  8, so is 1 over 6, so is 1 over 7, so this sum is bigger than or equal to 1 a plus 1 a plus 1 a plus 1 a plus 1 a plus 1 a plus 1 a plus 1 a plus 1 a plus
1 a, which equals 1 1, which equals 1 1, 1, 1, 1, and so on. So maybe I should have said that before I went into the actual computation, but in the end, we get that this subsequence of partial sums
of partial sums, S to the 2L, so let me just summarize, this is bigger than or equal  L plus 2 over 2. And as L gets very large, this thing gets very large. So this implies S to the 2L, this subsequence, L equals 1 to infinity is unbounded, which implies that the full
subsequence  the full subsequence of partial sums is unbounded. And therefore, the sequence of partial sums does not converge, and therefore, that
series does not converge.  We see that the converse does not hold for that question or for that theorem, I will just make a very
passing mention to the fact that there are fields for which that does hold, so not ordered fields, because, again, ordered fields with at least upper bound property  And therefore, we've just shown that the converse of that theorem does not hold. But in fact, if you look at the so-called
piatric numbers, they do have this property that if the sequence of terms converges to 0, then the series converges, but we will never see periodic numbers. I just wanted to do a little bit of a little bit of service to that fact that there are, at least  of numbers that do have this property. And so we had a theorem about limits of sequences and how they interact with algebraic operations, this
naturaly implies a theorem about series, so let alpha be in R, and  or some end, let's suppose we have two convergent series, then if I look at the
series alpha xn plus yn, so then  new terms, so the terms of minus series are alpha times x sub n plus y sub n, this is a
convergent series, and the sum of this series is equal to what you  So the sum of the series alpha xn plus yn is equal to alpha times the sum of xn's plus
plus the sum of yn's. So this theorem follows essentially, or kind of immediately from what we did for sequences,  partial sum satisfy, if I look at some stopping at M, alpha xn plus yn, now just by the linearity of just adding up
finity many terms, I'm not going to put something down below because I really don't need to, this is equal to alpha times the partial sum of x sub n plus  partial sum corresponding to y sub n. And so we're assuming this sequence of partial sums
sums converges, and this sequence of partial sums converges, so therefore, this term on the right-hand side converges, which implies the left side converges.  linear properties of limits, namely that the limit of the sum is the sum of the limits, and multiplication just by fixed real numbers,  corresponding to the new series equals alpha plus plus, and that's just alpha times sum xn plus
sub yn, and that's the n.  Now, remember, we had certain sequences, which we could tell
tell whether they converge a little bit easier  just an arbitrary sequence, a couple examples of, at least one example of a sequence, we could decide if it converges,
kind of, easily, is a monotone increasing sequence, and we showed that a monotone increasing sequence converges if and only if it's bounded.  not sequences, but series that have non-negative terms that I'm adding up, because the partial sums
corresponding to a series that has non-negative terms form a monotone increasing sequence, and that's not too hard to show.  Now, we're going to discuss a little bit about sequences, or look at sequences which have non-negative terms, so that
theorem is the following, if for all n, a natural number, xn is bigger than or equal to 0, so all these terms are non-negative, then the series converges  if and only if the sequence of partial sums, S sub n, so let's actually is bounded.  this sequence of partial sums is monotone. So here's the proof, it's quite easy.  from n equals 1 to M plus 1, x sub n, this is equal to sum from n equals M, xn plus xn plus xn plus 1. And now, the xn plus 1 term is non-negative, right? We're assuming all the terms are non-negative. So this is certainly bigger than or equal to sum from n equals 1 to M of xn, and that equals Sn.  So just summarizing for all natural numbers M, Sn plus 1 is bigger than or equal to Sn. If I just keep adding non-negative things, the partial sums are getting bigger.  is a monotone. So maybe I should have stated this slightly differently just so that you don't think this is part of one of the if and only, I mean, this is the assumption that we have for this whole statement.  sequence of partial sums is bounded. Based on the assumption that all the terms of
non-negative, we see that the sequence of partial sums is monotone increasing. Thus, by what we prove for sequences, every monotone increasing sequence converges if and only if it's bounded.  And that's it.  series we look at does have non-negative terms, but we can always form a certain series from those terms to make a new
non-negative terms, which gives us information about the original series, what am I going on about, and look at the convergence properties of that new series?  the following definition, that a series converges absolutely, we have absolute convergence, if the series formed by taking the absolute
value of the
absolute value  of these terms if this series converges. So what I was trying to get at before I stated this definition is that absolute convergence
implies usual convergence.  Now, before I prove this theorem, let me prove a little small theorem.  inequality for however many terms you like. So we'll prove this theorem in just a minute, but first let me
prove the following theorem that if m is bigger than or equal to 2 and x1 up to xm, R and R, then sum from n equals 1  m, xn take the absolute value of this sum, this is less than or equal to sum from n equals 1 to m of the absolute value. When m equals 2, this is just the usual form of the triangle inequality. So m equals 2, this is just saying x1 plus x2 is always less than or equal to x1 plus x2, which is just a triangle  inequality, but typically how life works, at least in analysis, if you can do it for two things, then you can do it for n things, or M things in this case, by induction. And so that's how we're going to prove this. So we'll first prove this triangle inequality by induction, so prove  Now, in the induction proofs we've done so far, n little n is our thing that we're inducting on, in this statement
M is the thing induction on M. So let's look at the base case, which is M equals 2.  the triangle inequality, for two real numbers that we've already proved before, x1 plus x2, and absolute value is always less than or equal to sum of x1 plus
the sum of x2, I mean, the absolute value of x1 plus and the absolute value of x2.  Now, we do the inductive step. So I'll assume the statement that I want to prove, usually I
use M, but now I'll go to the next letter L going in reverse alphabetical order, suppose if x1, xL, and R,  So let's actually, instead of just restating all that, just
call the statement star, so suppose star holds for m equals L. And now we want to prove that star holds for m equals L plus 1.  So star holds 4, m equals l plus 1.  then if I look at the sum from n equals 1 to L plus 1 xn, this is equal to sum from n equals 1 to L, xn plus x L plus 1, an absolute value, by the usual triangle
inequality for two terms,  this is less than or equal to sum from n equals 1 to L of xn in an absolute value plus an absolute value
of x L plus 1 by usual triangle inequality. And now, this term, since I'm assuming m equals L holds, so the m equals Lk says  this is less than or equal to sum from n equals 1 to L of xn plus x L plus 1 in absolute value, so this is by inductive hypothesis, and this is just equal to sum from n
equals 1 to L plus 1, xn.  So we've proven the case for now, M equals L plus 1. And that concludes the proof of this generalized triangle inequality with arbitrary
number of terms.  So let's get back to proving the theorem, the theorem that
absolute convergence implies convergence. So we'll do that by proving that absolute convergence implies that the series is Cauchy.  convergence implies usual convergence, so we will prove that, in fact, this series is Cauchy assuming
assuming that
assuming absolute convergence  And from last time, we had proved the statement, or at least this
followed from the statement for sequences that a Cauchy series converges, that a series is Cauchy if and only if it converges.  number, this means for all epsilon positive, there exists a natural number M, such that for all L bigger than M bigger than or equal to M, if I look at the sum from n equals M plus 1 to L of xn, this is less than epsilon.  So let epsilon be positive. So since we're assuming that the series is
absolute convergent, this implies that this series with absolute values here is also Cauchy.  that there exists a natural number M sub 0 such that for all L bigger than M bigger than or equal to M sub 0, if I look at the sum of absolute value from M plus 1 to L, this is less than epsilon. Now, this should have an absolute value on the
value on the outside, but this is a sum of non-negative terms, so the absolute value  it can be removed. I mean, you can essentially see where we're going, based on what's written on the board, what we want to prove, and what we know, and this triangle inequality.  choose M to be M sub 0, then if L is bigger than M is bigger than or equal to M, then the absolute value of the sum from M plus 1 to L, x sub n, this is less than or equal to the sum from n
equals M plus 1 to L of the L  the absolute values of x sub n by the theorem we proved just a minute ago, and this is less than epsilon by our
choice of M, right? M is equal to M0, and for M0, we have this inequality right here, less, this series is Cauchy, which implies it converges,  Basically, the only test you know for determining when a series is convergent is in 1 or 2,  and so all the terms are not non-negative, but the terms have a very simple form, that's the alternating
series test, which we'll discuss in a little bit, possibly the next lecture, and then when a series converges absolutely, we have a lot of test for that, we'll see that series which converge absolutely,  somehow or not fickle, meaning I can rearrange the terms and the rearrange series will still converge,
absolutely, and converge to the same thing that the original series converge to. So let me just make a brief comment after this theorem, we proved that absolute convergence  implies usual convergence and tie in a little bit to what I just said there. So we'll show that the series sum from 1 to infinity of minus 1 to the n, 1 over n, this converges.  But note that this series does not converge absolutely.  divergent. So now we're going to move on to some convergence test.  what these all follow from is basically what we know about geometric series and the
following comparison test, although when I do the proofs of the other convergence test, I won't actually state that I'm using the comparison test, but that's kind of what's really getting used.  test, and the statement is the following, suppose for all n a natural number, we're looking at non-negative terms with 1 smaller than the other, then the conclusion is if the bigger
1 converges  this implies that the smaller one converges, and if the smaller one diverges, this implies that the bigger one diverges.  OK, so how we're going to prove this is, so we're dealing with terms that are non-negative, so we'll use this theorem about a series of non-negative terms.  sequence of partial sums is bounded. So if this series converges, this implies that the sequence of partial sums  which implies that means that there exists something a non-negative number, such that for all
natural numbers M, sum from n equals 1 to M of y sub n is less than or equal to b.  all the xn's are less than or equal to the yn's, we get that the inf partial sum corresponding to the xn's, which is less than or equal to the inf partial sum for the yn's, is also less than or equal to b for all m.  So the sequence of partial sums corresponding to the xn's is bounded, and therefore, by the theorem we proved, which I think I have erased already,  Now, proving 2 is essentially, it's kind of the same thing, except the
equalities go the other way, and the xn's are getting bigger, which implies the yn's are also getting, or the partial sums corresponding to the xn's is getting bigger, implying that the partial sums corresponding to the yn's are also getting bigger.  if this series diverges, then this implies that partial sums is unbounded, we'll now prove that this implies that the
partial sums corresponding to the yn's are unbounded,  Now remember, what it means for a sequence to be bounded is that there exists a non-negative number b, such that for all m, I have that bound, so to say it's unbounded,
means that for all b, there exists a little m bigger than or  equal to capital n such that that that inequality is reversed. So let me put here in a box, what this actually means,
again, this means that for all b bigger than or equal to 0, there exists the M, natural numbers, so that yn equals 1 to M is bigger than or equal to b.  So this is a for all statement, so I have to be able to prove it for every b, b be bigger than or
or equal to 0, now since we know that the partial sums corresponding to the x n's is unbounded, this implies that there exists an M, a natural number,  such that sum from n equals 1 to M of xn is bigger than or equal to b. Now, so let me say, again, to show it's unbounded, I should really have, so for a sequence to be unbounded, I should have an absolute value here is bigger than or equal to b, but all of these terms are non-negative, and therefore, I can
remove the absolute value.  and the same thing here. So there exists a natural number M, so that I have this, and so let me put a little M0 there, because we have to somehow show there exists a little M, choose M to be this M0, so now if we look at the partial sums
for the y n's,  is bigger than or equal to because m equals M0, that's this term, which is bigger than or equal to b.  this series diverges. So let's use the comparison theorem to consider series like 1 over n p series and prove when they do converge.  theorem for p, a real number, the sum n equals 1 to infinity, 1 over n to the p
converges if and only if p is bigger than 1  So for the proof, now, why does the series converging imply p has to be bigger than 1?  suppose 1 over n to the p equals 1 to infinity converges, so we'll do the proof by contradiction that p has to be bigger than 1.  less than or equal to 1, this is bigger than or equal
to 1 over n. And this implies, since 1 over n, since the series corresponding to 1 over n diverges, implies that the series corresponding to 1 over n to the p diverges by the comparison test  which is a direct contradiction to what we're assuming that this series converges. So this must be false and p must be bigger than 1. So we've shown that if this series converges, then p has to be bigger than 1.  let's prove the other direction, and suppose p is bigger than 1, and prove that the p
series 1 over n to the p converges. So the way we're going to do this is kind of how  showed that the harmonic series is divergent. So what we're going to do is first, we're going to show that there is a subsequence of
partial sums corresponding to this guy that is bounded. So remember to prove that this converges, this converges if and only if the sequence of partial sums is bounded. And what we're going to first do towards that is prove that there is a subsequence of partial  sums, which is bounded. So we make a first claim that the sequence of partial sum, so S2 to the k,  So this is sum from n goes 1 to 2 to the k of 1 over n to the p. So I'll k, a natural number, this partial sum is bounded by a fixed number, depending on p, 1 plus 1 minus 2 to the minus p minus p minus 1.  there's this subsequence of partial sums corresponding to S2 to the k is bounded. So again, we do this by grouping these terms according to which power of 2, the denominator is between and then estimate from above, now,
rather than from below like we did for the harmonic series.  we have S2 to the k equals 1. So again, we're grouping these terms
according to whether they're where they fall. So this is just write this out one more time. This is equal to 1 plus 1 1 1, 1 1, 1 1, 1 1, 1, 1,  plus 1 over 5 to the p plus 1 over a to the p plus, and then up until the last term.  And then now the terms that come in each of these blocks, 1 over n to the p. And so now I estimate 1 over n, not from below by this guy, but from above, by
putting in the smallest n  that n is in this block. So this is less than or equal to 1 plus sum from L equals 1 to k, sum from n equals 2 to the L minus 1 plus 1 to the L 1 over 2 to the L minus 1 plus 1  Now, this plus 1 is just making things bigger on the bottom. So if I remove it, I've made things bigger overall for this fraction. So this is less than or equal to sum from 1 equals L equals 1 to k, sum n equals 2 to the L minus 1, 2 to the L times 1 over 2 to the p times L minus 1.  If we do the same algebra we did a minute ago, this is equal to 1, L equals 1 to k. Now, I have this term coming out. And then the number of terms I have here, just like I did for the harmonic
series, this is equal to 2 to the L minus 2 to the L minus 1 plus 1 plus 1,  And now, this is equal to 1 plus sum from l equals 1 to k. And so this whole thing here is equal to 2 to the l minus 1, so I get 2 to the minus p minus 1, l minus 1,  and shift this index, I actually, I guess I could have made that sharper, but it doesn't matter, I could shift this index L by, no, L starts at 1 and goes to k, and here I have the sum L minus 1, so I can shift this index to go from L
equal to k minus 1,  2 to the minus p minus 1 L, so I should have, this is like making a change of
variables, L prime equals L minus 1, and so let me put L prime instead of L. Now, p is bigger than 1, so this corresponds to a geometric series now, so let me actually rewrite  write this as 1 over 2 to the p minus 1 to the l prime, when p is bigger than 1, then 1 over 2 to the p minus 1 is less than 1. So this thing is a k minus 1 partial sum for the geometric series with this as R. So this is always bounded above by  if I add up all the terms, which equals that thing that I have up there, 1 over 1 minus 2 to the minus p minus 1.  And along this subsequence, these partial sums are bounded by this fixed number. And now I claim that this proves that the whole sequence of partial sums is bounded, in fact, by the same number.  less than or equal to this number again, 1 minus 2 to the minus p minus 1. So let m be a natural number, so we're trying to prove this bound, what do we do? We find a dyadic number, a number of the form 2 to the k bigger than m, and since 2 to the m is bigger than m, I think that's maybe one of the first things  by induction, we get that S to the m, or S sub m, which is the n-th partial sum of non-negative terms, this is going to be less than or equal to, since this is a monotone increasing
guy, this is going to be less than or equal to S to the 2m, which is less than or equal to 1 plus 1 minus 2 to the minus p minus 1,  OK, this, the sequence of partial sums is bounded, which implies this series converges. And that's the end of the proof, and I think we'll stop there.  you