 So we proved these two theorems last time, and we had a couple of applications of them.  value of xn minus x goes to 0, and then we also had the squeeze theorem that if you have three
sequences, a sub n, b sub n and x sub n so that x sub n is in between a sub n and b sub n, and the a sub n and b sub n converge to the same thing, then the sequence x sub n converges, and it converges to the common limit of a sub n and b sub n, so x sub n gets squeezed in between a sub n and b sub n  And last time, we used this to prove a kind of special limit that this equals 0 if the absolute value of c is less than 1, so I had proved it for c
positive and maybe c less than  one, but same proof works with absolute value just because the absolute value of c to the n equals the
absolute value of c raised to the nth power. So let's use this to do a few more special limits if you like, but first, I'm going to state the binomial theorem, I'm not going to prove it, but it's a simple exercise  induction, and the bidomial theorem says that for all n, the natural numbers, x, y in R, x plus y raised to the n is equal to the sum from k equals 0 to n of n
choose k, x to the n minus k  y to the k, and here n choose k, this is equal to n factorial over k factorial,
of k factorial divided by n minus times n minus k factorial. So again, you can prove this by inducting on n.  We have a theorem, so we'll prove a few special limits, I have a real number that's positive, then the limit as n goes to infinity of 1 over n to the p equals 0.  if p is positive, then limit as n goes to infinity of p to the 1 over n equals 1, and the third is, it's just that a certain limit,
exists limit as n goes to infinity of n to the 1 over n equals 1,  OK, let me make a small comment here. So so far in our discussion of the real numbers, we've only defined what it means to take a real number to an integer power, but n-th roots.  using that, we can then define how to take a real number to a rational
power, although there needs to be something that's check to make sure this is well-defined, because you can always write a rational number, not uniquely as one integer over another, so we can define a positive real number to a rational  power, but using really only the elementary facts about the real numbers, the fact that it has a least upper
bound property and the fact that the rationals are somehow dense in the real numbers, we can then define what it means to take a positive real number to a positive real number power.  to a positive real number or to a real number of power, doesn't require the introduction of the
explanential or logarithm, although they, in the end, to, they both agree, once you do have the exponential and the logarithm.  number power, but we're just going to use the basic properties of
explanements throughout all this so we don't, I mean, we haven't even talked about continuity or derivatives or anything like that, so we'll just use elementary means to be able to prove these statements.  which remember, means for every epsilon positive, we should be able to find a
capital number M, such that if n is bigger than or equal to capital M, 1 over n to the p is less than epsilon.  is greater than 1 over epsilon to the 1 over p. And if n is bigger than or equal to M, 1 over n to the p minus 0, which equals 1 over n to the p, this is less than or equal to 1 over capital M to the p.  kind of an elementary fact that we all know is that if I have a positive
positive power here, then little n is bigger than or equal to capital M, then n to the p would be bigger than or equal to capital M to the p. We do know that for integer exponents, but just trust me that one can define non-entity and that inequality remains true as long as the power that you're using is positive.  So I have 1 over n to the p is less than or equal to 1 over capital M to the p, and by our choice of capital M, this is less than epsilon. So that proves number 1, so number 2, we really only need to do two cases. 1 is p so p equals 1 is fine.  this is clear because then I just get 1 for the whole sequence, so that's 1 case, now let me do
p bigger than 1, and if p is bigger than 1, the absolute value of p to the 1 over n minus 1, this is just p to the 1 over n minus 1,  this quantity here goes to 0. So we have an inequality which we proved, actually, in the second lecture I think, using induction, but you can actually get
from a binomial theorem as well, so let me just recall this right here, that we had this inequality that if x is bigger than  equal to minus 1, then 1 plus x raised to the n is bigger than or equal to 1 plus n x. And so we use this inequality now with x equals p minus 1. So p is equal to 1 plus p to the 1 over n minus 1
rays to the n-th power  I'm sorry, x is p to the 1 over n minus 1, not p minus 1. And now we use this inequality, this is bigger than or equal to this
thing times n plus 1, so then I'll go over here. So now subtracting the 1 and dividing it by n,  to the 1 over n minus 1 is less than or equal to p minus 1 over n. And as we noted here, since p is bigger than 1, this is
bigger than or equal to 0. And now we apply the squeeze theorem. By squeeze theorem, this is just going to 0, p minus 1 divided by n, that's just a number over n, this goes to 0 as n goes to  infinity, and in fact, that's contained in number 1 for p equals 1, and also by our limit facts that we proved from last time that the limit
respects the algebraic operations of the real numbers, so by the squeeze theorem, since this converges to 0, and this converges to 0,  which implies that. So that deals with the case p is bigger than 1, to deal with p less than 1, we use the case b bigger than 1, and, again, the fact that limits respect algebraic operations,  and we write the limit as p, it's like we look in p, make that better. The limit as n goes to infinity of p to the 1 over n, now p is less than 1, so 1 over p is bigger than 1, this is equal to the limit as n goes to infinity of 1 over 1 over p to the 1 over n. And now, 1 over p is bigger than 1,
race to the 1 over n power converges  So 1 by the case we did before, and so 1 over this converges to 1 over 1 equals 1.  by induction, it actually follows from the binomial theorem, and we'll use the
bindomial theorem to get a little bit of a different inequality that we'll use for number 3.  going to show converges to 0 now, I'm going to write xn. So let xn equal n to the 1 over n minus 1, which we note is bigger than or equal to 0 for all n. And so my goal I want to show is limit as n goes to infinity of x sub n equals  0, because then that proves that this converges to 0, and since this is equal to its absolute value, that means that
n to the 1 over n converges to 1. And the way we're going to do that is using an inequality we get from the binomial theorem.  look at 1 plus x to the n raised to the n, this is just, let's just n, let me move it over a little bit, 1 plus x to the n, raised to the n, x to the n, x sub n is n to the 1 over n minus 1, at 1, I get n to the 1 over n, raised to n, I get n.  from k equals 0 to n, n choose k, and I have 1 raised to the n minus k power x to the n raised to the k.  quotients of factorial, so they're always non-negative as well. So this sum is always bigger than or equal to 1 term from the sum, so it's
bigger than or equal to k equals 2, say, y2, you'll see x sub n squared. Now, n choose 2, this is equal to n factorial over 2, factorial n minus 2,  factorial x to the n squared, x sub n squared, which equals n times n minus 1 over 2, x
of n squared. Now, I started off with n, and I proved it was bigger than or equal to this quantity here. So now I divide what's in front of the x sub n  and take square roots, so then that implies that for all n bigger than 1, because I need to divide
by n minus 1, 0, which is bigger than or equal to n, x sub n is less than or equal to 2 over n minus 1, square root,  And now this is just 0, so it converges to 0. This right-hand side is square root of 2 over n minus 1. Now, the limit as n goes to infinity of 2 over n minus 1 is 0, square root of that also converges to 0, that's a fact we did from the end of last time, so this whole thing converges to 0.  of x sub n, which remember, this is just n to the 1 over n
minus 1, which implies, that completes the proof.  So now we are going to study a couple of objects related to a
bounded sequence. So why are we going to what's the underlying question we're going to try to answer? Whenever something's introduced, you should think of it in terms of what's the question that was asked that this is trying to answer?  limsup and liminf of a sequence. So here's the question. So we've seen sequences that don't necessarily converge, like minus 1 to the n, but we know about
subsequences now where you just  going to pick entries along the sequence, you pick one, move to the
right and pick the next one. Now, if you look at minus 1 to the n, if I just look at the subsequence consisting of picking the odd entries, the odd numbered entries in the sequence, and I just get minus 1 minus 1 minus 1 minus 1 minus 1 for my new subsequence in this converges, is just constant, or if I chose the even 1's, I get 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1,  that converges, so this sequence, which is bounded, has a convergent subsequence. Now, not all sequences have convergent subsequences, for example, if you look at the
sequence x sub n equals n, so x sub n is just 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 5, 6, and so on, that will not have any convergent subsequences, because any subsequence of that has to be unbounded.  And we know that a convergent sequence is bounded. So what am I getting at? So the question that we're going to ask and try to answer is the following, does every bounded sequence have a
  convergent subsequence, and what I was just going on about right there is that we know this is true for, for example, for the
sequence minus 1 to the n, we also know this is true for convergent sequences, convergent sequences are bounded, so they have convergent subsequences,  begin with, and we have to throw in this bounded part because there are sequences that don't have any convergent
subsequences, like I just said, x sub n equals n is an example of an unbounded sequence that doesn't have any convergent sequences, subsequences.  And this is due to Bolzano and Yorstrass and I'll restate it in a little bit when we get to the statement of that theorem, namely that every bounded
sequence says have a convergent subsequence.  in analysis, so let's get to the definition of these guys.  define if they exist, there's going to be certain limits, so it's not clear that they
exists at all to begin with, but we'll show that they always do exist.  a number, and this is equal to the limit as n goes to infinity of a new sequence obtained from the
old sequence x sub n, what are the entries of this new sequence, this is sup of x sub k, k bigger than or equal to n, and the liminf is similar, except it's,  with M's. So for each natural number n, I take the supremum of the set of elements x sub k for k bigger than or equal to n. So this is a bounded set because the
sequences bounded, so this supremum is well-defined, same thing for the M's.  a new number for each n. And I take the limit of those numbers, and I define 1 to be the limsup, 1 to be the liminf if they exist, because limits don't always exist, so it's not even clear that these two limits
are actually are meaningful. And the first thing that we'll do is we'll prove that these limits do, actually,  So rather than keep writing this, I'm going to give these right some symbols for these two things, let a sub n to be, so of course, if I forget to say this, at least in what I'm talking about with respect to limsup and limsup and liminf, I'm always talking about a bound sequence, let me
continue to state that, as one of my hypothesis, let x sub n be a  in the sequence and let a sub n be the supremum of the set of all elements x of k, where k is bigger than or
or equal to n, and b sub n to be the infimum  x sub k, k bigger than or equal to n. So then there's a couple of statements.  what these things have to do with the limsup and liminf, then the limsup of x sub n, this is defined to be the limit as n
goes to infinity of the a sub n's and the liminf of x sub n, this is defined to be the limit as n goes to infinity of the b sub n's. So we need to show what we're going to show is that  the limit of a sub n as n goes to infinity of a sub n exists, and the limit as n goes to infinity
of b sub n exists. So how we're going to show that is, we're going to show that a sub n is monotone decreasing and bounded, and so these  are the conclusion, so I should say, then the sequence b sub n is monotone
increasing and bounded, so in particular, since we know  that if we have a monotone sequence, which is bounded, it has to converge, that means these two limits exist, and then the second
part of this theorem is the simple statement that  the inf of x sub n is less than or equal to the limsup of x sub n.  a simple kind of theorem first, so let's put the proof of this theorem on hold just for a second, and now
prove a very simple theorem that if a, and b are subsets of real numbers, a, b both not equal to the empty set, and a is a subset of b,  So also need to be bounded. So if we take two non-empty
subsets of real numbers such that b are bounded and a is a subset of b, then the conclusion is that the inf of b  is less than or equal to the inf of a, and this is always less than or equal to the sup of a, and this is less than or equal to the sup of b.  So the sup of a smaller set is smaller than the sup of the bigger set, and that
inequality reverses for infs, the inf of the smaller set is bigger than or equal to the inf of the bigger set.  b is an upper bound for b, and a is a subset of b, this implies that cb is an upper bound for a,  b sits above everything in b, a is a subset of b, so it sits above everything for a. Now, the supremum of a is supposed to be the least
upper bound, and therefore, if I take any upper bound for a, that has to be bigger than or equal to the sup of a.  So similar for M's. OK, so let's go back to the proof of this theorem here that if I have a bounded sequence, then the limsup and the liminf exist, and we show that by
proving that,  these two sequences have these monotonicity properties, so
proof now of the theorem we were started off proving, so since the set of xk's with k bigger than or equal to n plus 1  a subset of xk's for k bigger than or equal to n, because now I have a set or k starting at n plus 1, here's the set with k
starting at n, so this is clearly contained in here, this implies that a sub n plus 1, which is the sup of the left-hand side, by this little theorem that I  here is less than or equal to the sup of the bigger set, and this is just a sub n. So we've proven for all n, a sub n plus 1 is less than or equal to a sub n.  And so this uses the sup part of this previous theorem, but if we use the inf part, then we also get the
statement for the b sub n. So rather than write out the details, I'll leave it to you just to flip around the inequalities for the inf in your notes.  a natural number, b sub n is bigger than or equal to b sub n plus 1, or other way.  x sub n's are bounded, since there exists a b bigger than or equal to 0 such that,
call n, natural numbers, x sub n in absolute value is less than or equal to b, which is the same as a and b is x sub n is bounded between minus b and capital B.  elements of each of these sets, if you like, this x sub k, k bigger than or equal to n, that means minus b is always a
lower bound for these sets, and b is always an upper bound for these sets. So this implies that minus b is always less than or equal to x sub k, k bigger than or equal to n,  this always sits below this supremum, and the supremum, since all of these are bounded above by B, the supremum has to be less than or equal to B, which I'll state in terms of the a sub n's and b sub n's, means minus b is less than or equal to b sub n is less than or equal to a sub n is less than or equal to b.  So in fact, these two implies that. So we've shown that these two sequences that define, that we used to define the limsup and the liminf are monotone and bounded, so therefore, the limit of these two
sequences  the limits, which define the limsup and liminf, actually exists. limsup and liminf is always a well-defined
object. Now, this proves 1 to prove 2, this follows immediately from what we've proven right here.  And last time, we proved that taking the limit respects
inequality, so the limit as n goes to infinity of b sub n, which is the liminf sits below limit as n goes to infinity of a sub n, which is the limsup, and that completes the proof.  inf exist and are well-defined for every bounded sequence. So this is kind of can be a little bit of a daunting couple of objects to come across when you, especially in your first
analysis class, so the best thing to do is look at examples. Whenever you come across something that you just don't
fight to understand, start writing down  some actual things. So for example, let's, again, let's look at our favorite
example of a bounded sequence, which does not converge, x sub n equals minus 1 to the n.  and are equal to k, writing a set of x sub n, let me just write what it is,
minus 1 to the n. So what is this set? This is just a set consisting of two elements, 1 and minus 1. And therefore, the sup of this set, which is the sup of this set, is just 1,  So if I take, which implies that the limsup of minus 1 to the n, which is the limit as n goes to infinity of sup  minus 1 to the n and bigger than or equal to the k, as we just saw, this is just a sup of this set
consisting of two elements, 1 and minus 1, this is equal to the limit as n goes to infinity of 1 equals 1. So the limsup of minus 1 to the n is 1. Now, if I change all these supes to infs, then the inf of this set is going to be the inf of this set, which is just minus 1,  So the limsup is 1, the liminf is minus 1 for this set. That's just supposed to be a squarely not line
not necessarily looking like a sigma.  our next favorite sequence, x sub n equals 1 over n. So the set of elements 1 over n, such that n is bigger than or equal to 1 over k, I should write.  writing x sub k. So that should be x sub k, all of that is written correctly, this should have
been minus 1 to the k, minus 1 to the k. So we're looking at now the set 1 over k, where n is, where k  is bigger than or equal to n, so this is just the set 1 over n, 1 over n plus 1, 1 over n plus 2, 1 over n plus 3, and so on.  And in fact, this sequence just here, now written as thinking of this as a new, so this is not a
sequence, this is a set, but taking entries to be these guys, it's easy to see that that converges to 0. So anyways, let's say I take the supremum of this set, which is what I need to compute the limsup, so I'm now taking the supremum of this set, 1 over n plus  one, that's always smaller than 1 over n, and so is 1 over n plus 2, and so on, and so on, and 1 over n is an element of the set that's bigger than or
equal to everything else in the set, and I think there's an exercise in the homework that as you just show that if you have a set that contains an element which is an upper bound for the set, then that has to be the supremum, so the supremum of this set is simply 1 over n.  So this supremum is equal to 1 over n. So as n goes to infinity, the limit of this supremum here, which equals the limit as n goes to infinity of 1 over n equals 0.  So the inf of this set, these are elements that are getting closer and closer
and closer and closer and closer to 0.  there's 0, 1 over n, and then they just keep getting smaller and smaller and smaller and
smaller and smaller converging to 0, and you can, in fact, prove this rigorously if you like, but I think it's easy to at least convince yourself that the infimum of this set is equal to 0.  anything bigger than 0, that thing cannot be an upper bound, simply because if you like the Archimedean property, I can always find something from the set less than
that real positive, real number, so 0 must be the least upper bound.  inf of this set is just the limit as n goes to infinity of 0,
equal to the limsup of 1 over n equals 0, the liminf equals 0 as well.  So let's take a look at these two examples a little bit, and let me just make a few remarks.  However, in this example, the limsup, which is 0 equals the liminf, which is 0. Now, what's the difference between these two
sequences, what's the property that one holds, but the one has what the other doesn't? This is a convergent sequence, and this one is not. And we'll see, this is a general fact that if we have a convergent sequence, then the limsup and the liminf equal each other, and are equal to the limit of the original sequence  as a sequence converges to 0. But that's not just a one-way street, it's a two-way street that, in fact, will prove if the limsup equals the liminf, then the original
sequence converges. So the sequence converges if and only if the limsup equals the liminf, and we saw here, that kind of that in on display, that the limsup and the liminf don't equal each other, and the original sequence  so we know or shown last time, last time,
doesn't converge. And so one other thing I'd like to point out is that the limsup of this guy is 1, the liminf of this guy is a minus 1, and now we can also find a subsequence which converges to 1, which is the limsup, right?  even numbered entries, and that just produces a sequence 1, and that sequence converges to 1. If we take the odd entries of the
sequence, that subsequence is just minus 1 and converges to minus 1, which is the liminf, and that's also a general fact, we'll prove that for any bounded sequence, there exists subsequences converging to the limsup and the liminf, and that will give us the proof of this  And I think that's all of the remarks I want to say, and let me make another important comment. So this sequence, which we use to define the limsup and also the liminf, and in three out of these four cases, they were actual subsequences. So the sup of this set equals 1, which I can
considerate as a subsequence of the original guy,  And the same thing for the liminf, the inf of this set was minus 1, which I can consider as a subsequence of
minus 1 to the n, and for the sup of this set, I got 1 over n, which this is just equal to the original sequence. So it's definitely I can consider it as a subsequence of the original sequence, but if I take the infimum of this set, which I need to define the liminf,  we got 0 for every entry, which is not a subsequence of this
orational sequence. So all of that is to say that the sequences I get through this process to define the limsup and liminf are not necessarily subsequences of the original sequence.  we're going to prove. So theorem, and this will give us a Bolzano-Weierstrass, essentially,
immediately, right after it, let xn be a bounded sequence,  then there exists subsequences xn sub k and xm sub k, so they don't necessarily have to be the same subsequence, such that limit as k goes to infinity
of x sub n sub k equals  the limsup, so it's a convergent subsequence, and the limit as k goes to infinity of x m sub k,
produces the liminf, and so before I prove this, this immediately gives the Bolzano-Weierstrass theorem,  which is that every bounded sequence has a convergent subsequence.  So again, this follows immediately from the previous
theorem, because if I take a bounded sequence, by the previous theorem, I can find a subsequence which converges to the limsup, which always exists for a bounded sequence.  So the reason this is kind of so powerful and so strong is that it to get your hands on something, it doesn't require you to show something as strong as showing there is a sequence converging to that.  where you want to show that a minimum of something always exists or a maximum of something
always exists, well, what you can try and do is take a sequence of guys that you stick into here, so this is a general nonsense, that you stick into your machine or function that spits out output and these outputs are approaching the maximum or approaching the minimum.  that there does, in fact, exist an element that you can stick into your machine and
produce the maximum amount of output. Now, maybe it's not clear how to do that. So first, take a sequence so that the values are approaching that the outputs are approaching the maximum, maybe you could show that the inputs converge to something, but that's typically really  hard, but you don't have to work that hard, is what this theorem says, it says that what you really need to do, and which is much more
straight forward or simpler or possible, really, is to show that that sequence of inputs that you put into your machine to get the outputs is a bounded sequence.  proceed in that way by showing that you do have some minimum or maximum
minimum or maximum input that produces a maximum output or minimum output. So that's a bit of small bit of rambling about why this theorem is so useful is that, again, to get your hands on something that typically you want to study, it's very difficult  convergence to that thing you want to study, or that thing exists because there's a sequence that you come up with at
hoc actually converges to that thing. This theorem says you don't need to work that hard or try to do the impossible, and typically it's much easier just to proceed by showing your sequence of inputs is bounded.  useful, it's also useful in the study of PDEs, which is what I study, so I have a soft spot for it,
actually one of its generalizations. So let's prove this theorem that there exists subsequences, which converge to the limsup and liminf.  I'm not going to, actually, I'm not even going to do this
statement, I'm going to leave this as an exercise, I'm going to do this statement, I'm going to use this notation a sub n as before, a sub n be sup of x sub k bigger than or equal to n.  And so what I'm going to do is I'm going to try to have a subsequence of elements between a sub n and a sub n minus
something which is converging to 0 and not quite a sub n's, it'll be along a subsequence as well.  And by the exercise from assignment 3, that there exists an n sub 1 bigger than or equal to 1, such that a sub 1 minus 1 is less than or equal to a sub 1, is less than or equal to a sub 1.  I mean, that's a sub 1 minus 1 is not an upper bound for the set a sub 1, which is x sub k is for k is bigger than or
or equal to 1, therefore, I should be able to find an element from this set strictly bigger than that, and of course, it's always less than or equal to the supremum, which is a sub 1.  since a sub n sub 1 plus 1, so a sub n sub 1 plus 1, not 1 plus 1, since this thing equals the supremum of x of k, such k is bigger than or
or equal to n sub 1 plus 1, there exists an a  a sub n sub 2, at least there exists an n sub 2 bigger than n sub 1, in fact, it has to be bigger than or equal to n
sub 1 plus 1, such that a sub n plus 1 minus 1, minus 1, a 1, is less than a sub n sub 2, is less than or equal to a sub n plus 1.  So why the n sub 1 plus 1 is because I want to obtain a new entry
from the sequence that comes from farther than the index n sub 1. I'm trying to build a subsequence, and, like I said, the idea is, I want to somehow sandwich this should be x sub n.  to the limsup and use the squeeze theorem. So since this is a supremum of this set, and because this thing is not an upper bound for this set, there exists something from this set, so some
element k bigger than or equal to n sub 1 plus 1, which I'm going to call n sub 2, so that x sub n sub 2 is bigger than a sub n plus 1  1 plus 1. And then I just keep doing this, since a sub 2 plus 1 equals the supremum of the x sub k, such that k is bigger than or equal to n sub 2 plus 1, there  such that a sub n sub 2 plus 1 minus now a third is less than x sub n sub
n sub 3 is less than or equal to a sub n sub 2 plus 1.  But now we're essentially home free, we'll just continue in this manner. So let me write down, now strictly speaking, I need to state the construction of this sequence as an inductive
argument, but  for the purposes of this class, I'm not going to do that, I'm just going to say
continuing in this manner, and that will be what I say for this part.  we obtain a sequence of integers, natural numbers, n sub 1, less than n sub 2, less than n sub 3, and so on, such that what holds, such that for all k,  a natural number, a sub n sub k minus 1 plus 1 minus 1 minus 1 over k is less than or equal to x n sub k, less than or equal to a
sub n sub k minus 1 plus 1.  And here, if you like, we didn't define what n sub 0 is. So really, we're only interested in the n sub 1, n sub 2.  to find to be 0, that's just the first case that we dealt with. So we obtained this subsequence x sub n sub k that's sandwiched in between this subsequence of a's and minus 1 over k, and this subsequence of a sub n sub k minus 1.  n sub 1 is less than n sub 2, and so on, this implies that n plus 1 is less than
n sub 2 plus 1, is less than n sub 3 plus 1. So this is a subsequence, a sub n sub n sub k  k minus 1 plus 1 is a subsequence of a sub n's. Now, what do we know? We know the a sub n's converge to the limsup, right? And we proved last time that every subsequence of a convergent
sequence converges to the same thing.  thus the limit as k goes to infinity of a sub n sub k minus 1 plus 1 equals the limit of the
original sequence, which is by definition the limsup. So now I have this subsequence of x's  sandwiched in between two sequences, this guy on the left, this guy on the right, this guy on the right,
this guy on the right converges to the limsup, this guy on the left converges to the limsup minus 0, because 1 over k converges to 0.  of this and this whole thing, which is the limsup. And again, so I'll leave it to you to do the liminf part. But the point is, is that now, basically, this 1 over k gets moved over here, and this
becomes a sub n sub k minus 1 plus 1, plus 1,  plus 1 over k, and now I just have this on the
setting below this guy, this guy, really the only change for the infs to get a subsequence converging to the liminf.  gives us the Bolzano-Weierstrass theorem. And now, let me come back to the statement I made about these two
sequences here, namely that the limsup equals the liminf if and only if the original sequence converges.  x sub n be a bounded sequence, then xn converges if and only if the limsup equals the liminf, and there's one more part  more over if xn converges, then all these limits
agree equals the limsup equals the limit.  that we do have this limit of the sequence is given by this
common value of the limsup and liminf.  limsup, x sub n equals the lim of x sub n. So here we're trying to we're assuming that these two things equal each other, they're given by a
common value L, and what we're going to end up showing is that this sequence converges to L. So that actually gives the second part of the statement of the statement of the theorem here.  limsup and liminf, then for all in a natural number, we have that the inf of the x of k's, which is for k bigger than or equal to n, so x sub n is in this set, so it's certainly bigger than or equal to this inf, and is less than or equal to the sup of that set.  again, because x sub n sits in this set. But as n goes to infinity, this sequence of numbers
converges to the liminf, which is L, as n goes to infinity, this sequence of numbers converges to the limsup, which is L. So by the squeeze theorem, the thing in between, which is x sub n converges to L.  So for the second part, it's follows from what we've proven what we proved to obtain the
belzano-Weierstrass  And what we know about convergent sequences and their subsequences, this is for this direction,
namely, that convergence implies the limsup equals the n liminf, so let L be the limit as n goes to infinity of x sub n. So now we're assuming that the sequence converges to something, which we call L,  have to be the same L from it's not going to be, so it's just L, I'm just using
for this limit by previous theorem, there exists a subsequence, such that the limit as k goes  infinity of x sub n sub k gives me limsup of x sub n, but this is a subsequence of a convergent sequence, and a
subsequence of a convergent sequence is convergent and converges to the same thing. So this thing on the left is just equal to L,  Similarly, there exists a subsequence x sub n sub k such that the limit as k goes to infinity of x sub m sub k equals
liminf of x sub n. And again, this is a  a subsequence of a convergent sequence, so it's convergent and converges to the same thing L, so that implies that this
thing is equal to L. And therefore, the limsup and the liminf equal each other, and they also equal the limit of the original sequence.  the end of the proof of this theorem, that the limsup and liminf, when they coincide, and tell you that the
original sequence converges, so that's another way of thinking about limsupes and liminfs is that they also somehow measure just how divergent your sequence is, at least the difference between them.  So I think we'll stop there.