 So we ended last time with some these elementary property that you know about the absolute value, so we proved one more
theorem about the absolute value, which maybe you didn't  cover and calculus, but it's a fundamental important in real analysis, which is the triangle inequality, which states that for all x, y and R, the absolute value of x plus y is less than or equal to the
absolute value of x,  plus the absolute value of y. So why is it called a triangle inequality?  and then the vector x plus y is this side, then what this is stating is that the length of one of these
sides of this triangle is less than or equal to the sum of the two sides, the sum of the lengths of the other two sides of the triangle.  So that's why it's called the triangle inequality. So the proof is not very
difficult, although this inequality is probably one of the three most useful things you'll learn in this class if you go on to study more analysis, the other one being, so I'm coming, this is not  from PDEs, so I guess I'm kind of viewing it through that lens of what I find useful in PDEs, but
triangle inequality, integration by parts, change of variables, those three power, the analysis machine that I'm most familiar with.  by property number 6, the x is less than or equal to the absolute value of x and y is less than or equal to the
absolute value of y, so their sum is less than or equal to the absolute value of x plus y. And not only that, I can replace x by minus x, and I get minus x plus minus y, this is less than or equal to the absolute value  plus the absolute value of minus y, but this is just
absolute value of x plus y, and both of these therefore imply, so if I just take this and multiply it through by minus 1,  this inequality, which by number 5, in the properties that we proved for the absolute value,
implies that the absolute value of x plus y is less than or equal to the absolute value of x plus the absolute value of y.  about the reverse triangle inequality, which will make an apparent
appearance in your assignment, and so this involves the absolute value of x minus y, and the absolute value of the difference in the absolute value, y is it reverse, because the inequality reverses.  the absolute value of x minus the absolute value of y, take the absolute value, this is less than or equal to the
absolute value of x minus y and you'll prove this in the assignment. So this follows from the triangle inequality, but these two inequalities get used quite a bit, and we'll use them quite a bit throughout the course.  So let me take a minute to reconnect R with what you know and love from calculus, namely, decimals, and we're going to use this fact about R to answer a natural question that maybe you're
asking yourself, which is the following.  as a question. So this first part is not a question. We've already addressed this in the first assignment, in fact, that the rationals is accountable, in fact, you did it for the positive
rationals, but if the positive rationals are accountable, you can then prove that all rationals are accountable.  a natural question, a natural question is, are countable, is a set of
real numbers countable? So in the end, I'm not going to leave the n suspense, the answer is no. And we're going to prove this, but let me just make a few remarks about what this says.  it's the following, so if Q, so this is not a proof of this, I'm just going to make a
remark based on this answer.  accountable, this implies that our takeaway Q, the set of irrational numbers, is in fact uncountable.  then you can map in a bijective fashion, the rationals to the natural numbers, and the irrationals also to the natural numbers, but then you can map those
natural numbers to 0, minus 1, minus 2, minus 3, and so on. So then you find that there is a bijection from Q to the natural numbers and the irrationals to the integers less than or equal to 0, and therefore, there's a bijection from R to the  but the integers are countable, which would contradict the fact that R is uncountable. Therefore, the set of irrationals is uncountable.  expansions for our decimal representations of real numbers. So now, connecting rationals and irrationals to what you've seen since you're small, so to decimal, we typically  of a rational numbers as in terms of decimal, decimal representation, what does that mean?  some digit times 10 to the k plus 10 to the k minus 1 plus d0, and then we go to the 10th spot, so d to the minus 1, 10 to the minus 1, plus this is discussion, I'm not stating any
theorem's right now, until we get down to maybe some  last decimal spot, and with these digits, a subset of 0, 1, 9.  and then we write x as dk, dk minus 1, d minus 1, d minus 2, and so on. I'm using this notation because I'm going to be, this is a notation, I need to state the theorem
of the theorem about the real numbers,  it's quite silly that I'm about to write this down in this
setting, you know, welcome to MIT. So, for example, 1 times 10 plus 1 times 10 to the 0 plus 1 times 10 to the minus 1, this is supposed to represent the number 11.1,  which is the rational number, which is the rational number.  don't give me too hard of a time, and a lot of at least pure math, we typically write things in
rational numbers, I haven't had to write in decimal expansions quite some time. Now, of course, not all rational numbers can be written as a finite decimal expansion, for example, 1 third, you have to write as 0.3333333, so on and so on,  So that's not necessarily covered, under the discussion that I have right here, but it will be covered in what I'm about to
stay for the real numbers, so we could cover a third, and then we can also cover every real number if we allow infinite decimal representations, so I'll use the word decimal expansions or decimal representations,  make a definition, and what I'm going to state is about real numbers between 0 and 1, of course, if you want to
talk about real numbers bigger than 1, then you just tack on 1 if you like to the d0 place, so the infinite part is having to deal with what comes after the decimal point.  So this is a rigorous definition, let x in 0, 1, excluding 0, and let d minus j be n0, 1 to 9, or j a natural number.  say x is, so what does it mean to say that x is given by an infinite decimal
expansion, or given by an infinite decimal representation, we say x is represented by the digits,  And we write x is equal to d minus 1, d minus 2, minus 3, if, so this is a precise
meaning of this, if x is equal to the supremum of the set  So I take a finite decimal expansion, and then I get a number for each n, a natural number, so the first one is just d to d minus 1, 10 to the minus 1, and then for n equals 2, I tack on next to a 1, and then the
1, and then the 1, and so I get a set of real numbers,  If I take it supremum and I get x, then I say that x is represented by these digits or that this gives a decimal
representation of x so that this lines up with what you know, if I look at 0.25000,  the sup of a certain set, so let me do for this guy, so this is 2 over 10, and then now I add the 100's plus 5 over 100, and then 2 over 10 plus 5 over 100, this is a set, remember, plus 0 over 1,000 plus 1,  at each next guy, I'm supposed to take this and add on another 0, so as a set, this is just a set containing two
elements, namely 2, 10s, and 25 over 100, and so this is bigger than that guy, so the supremum is 25 over  which equals 1, which equals 1, 4. So all of that to tell you that, yes, this definition should, or at least
does ring true with what you were taught, that 1, 1, 4, is equal to 0.25.  OK, so I'm going to
do this.  And so this is the last bit of discussion about the elementary
properties of the real numbers, next we'll be talking about sequences of real numbers.  between 0 and 1 can be represented by a set of digits, or it has a decimal
representation in every set of digits corresponds to a decimal representation of a real number.  set of digits, d minus j with each of these d minus j's in 0, 0, up to 9,  then there exists a unique x n closed the interval 0, 1 such that x is equal to minus 1.  So you give me some digits, and I can find a unique real number that has that decimal
representation. Now, before I state the second part of the theorem, this says that I give you digits, I get a unique real number. Now, you ask about the other direction. If I have a real number, do I get a unique set of digits?  necessarily because, for example, 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1, this is equal to 0.500 and so on, but this is also equal to 0.499,999, and so on.  So if I gave you these digits, I would spit out 1 1 1 1, and only 1 1 1 1,
half, it wouldn't spit out 1 1 1 1 1, but if you give me a real number, there does not necessarily exist a unique set of digits giving a decimal expansion for that number, so I can have two different decimal expansions.  out, one unique choice by requiring that, in some sense, if I were to chunkate it, then the decimal expansion would be less than the
number I'm looking at, wanting to expand. So that's the second part of this theorem is that for every x in 0, 1, now excluding 0, there exists  exist unique digits, and as before, these are in 0, up to 9, such that x is such that these give a decimal
representation of x, and so what's  thing goes out of the choice if we're ever coming up
against these two things, and if I truncate a decimal expansion, so I'm not going to write zeros after that, I'm just going to truncate it, this always  10 to the minus n. So this inequality will always hold. And in fact, this inequality will always hold, and in fact, x is always bigger than or equal to this side, like no
no matter what, if x is given by  a decimal representation, so we always have these two, this is less than or equal to, and this is a less than or equal to, but we single out a unique
choice of decimal representation by choosing this to be a strict less than, so then that forces us to choose this guy over the sky.  the unique representation that satisfies this for 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, and for
example for 1 would be just 0.9999, because if I take this representation and cut it off, this is actually equal to 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1. So that was a lot of discussion about the theorem, but that was for a reason, because I'm not actually going to prove this theorem.  it's not entirely entirely difficult, it just uses the least upper bound property of the real numbers, but it's a little clunky to write down, and what I'd rather do is use this theorem to prove my answer, the answer to my question up there, on whether R is countable or not.  OK, so I'm actually going to use this theorem to prove the following
theorem due to Cantor, so we just went from absolute values, which maybe was not to shock and awe. Now, to this theorem, which to me is shock and awe, is that following  the interval 0, 1 is uncountable.  uncountable, so where do we go from this to that? Well, I'll let you think about that, but let's assume this was uncountable and R was countable, so I'm just going to say y out loud.  So it is this imply, and I'm going to give you a fake proof, but you can actually make this
completely rigorous, fake proof in the sense that I'm just going to write symbols that imply this.  is uncountable, then if this is uncountable, well, the function that takes an element in here, just
in to R, this is clearly bijective, so just the identity map from 0, 1 into R, is an injective map.  and the
infinality of R. In fact, maybe you can think about it, maybe I'll put it on the assignment, but in fact, one can prove they have the same
cardinality, but I have that, and this is uncountable, therefore, it's cardinality is bigger than the natural numbers.  OK, in other words, R is uncountable. So let's prove this theorem due to Cantor, now this other
theorem due to Cantor that the power set is bigger than the cardinality of the set, I mean, that was at least the proof, first time I saw,  this is also going to be some pretty crazy and
clever-shit, too. So this is what's referred to as canter's diagonalization argument, or diagonal argument, in the following. So we're going to prove this by contradiction.  in here, so suppose that in fact, it has the cardinality of the
natural numbers, and we're going to arrive at a contradiction. So then there exists a function, which I'm going to call x from natural numbers  0, 1, which is bijective.  able this inequality star, for each n, we write x of n, so this is an element of 0, 1, so this is bijective, so every
element in 0, 1 gets mapped onto, so we write x of n to be n, it's decimal representation, I have two indices now, 1 for the digit  and the one for which, at least I sheltered you from that sneeze by putting my hand over the microphone, on the microphone still on.  satisfying star. So each x in here can be written uniquely in a given decimal
representation, satisfying this inequality here. Now, what we're going to do is we're going to come up with a real number in the interval 0, 1, which x does not map to, which  therefore, contradicts the fact that x is a surjective surjective, byjective surjective
sejective means that everything has to get mapped onto, and that's the onto part, injective means it maps different things to different things. So what's the idea of finding this element that doesn't get mapped onto?  let me write down a few of these decimal expansions, and I may not want to do a fourth one,  and maybe I do. So this is, again, discussion, so I'm going to put this in brackets, meaning this is not
part of the proof, but this is part of the idea of what's going on, and where's the diagonal part?  And this should go off in this direction, and the decimal expansion
smart off in that direction. And so somehow, this list, if it kept going in that direction, would have to contain every real number between 0 and 1. And so what's the idea to come up with a real number between 0 and 1 that is not in this list, is we go down the diagonal  of the decimal expansions, and we change each decimal to something
else, then what it is. And so therefore, and then I take my element y, so remember we're trying to find a y, not in this list,  And then I would take y to be the real number that I get by changing each of these
decimal digits. So you can imagine if y somehow popped up, since I don't want to write anymore as x4, then somehow this number would have to be the digit for y  but I changed it, and therefore it's not the digit of y. So that's it in a nutshell, if you didn't get that that's fine, let me now write out the details.  of if the digit was a 0, I flipped it to 1. So you can imagine that if y did, and then I form y by flipping the digits.  in the same spot, just by how I've constructed y by flipping it, and therefore, y
can't be in that list, and therefore, this map cannot be surjective, which is our contradiction.  the j-th digit of the j-th x of j does not equal 1, 2 if the j-th digit of the j-th guy in that list or x of j does equal 1.  by part 1 of the theorem, previous theorem, there exists the unique y in 0, 1 without 0, y, because these digits are non-zero, it's always either 1 or 2.  y is equal to e minus 1, e minus 2, and so on. So more over, since all of these digits are either 1 or 2,  are certainly non-zero, so y is given by a decimal expansion where all of these things are non-zero.  minus n plus 1 is either 1 or 2, that's going to be positive, so that's less than y, and this is always the case that this is less than or equal to, so because all these digits are positive, if I cut it off, if I truncate it, then that number is going to be
less than y, because I'm missing stuff  out in the millions place or whatever, each time for each n. And therefore, this decimal expansion is the unique decimal representation  from part 2 of the theorem that I stated, every element in 0, 1 has a unique
representation satisfying that inequality, because all of these digits are positive, this, in fact, is a unique representation of this element y, which I've constructed by flipping digits from this map.  x is surjective, there exists an n, a natural number, this n has nothing to do with that n, maybe I'll use a
different letter M such that y equals x of M.  e to the minus m, so then this says that the m-th digit, which is, should be giving me e to the minus m, because this is equal to y, this, remember,
is equal to 1,  if dm2 if dm equals 1, in particular, this does not equal dm. So I have proven that this number does not equal itself.  I can never have this number, whatever it is, equal to this thing, because I'm always changing it. If this thing is 1, then this number is 2. If this number is not 1, then this number is 1, and therefore, it's not equal to that.  shows that the set is uncountable. So I hope I explained that, well enough, you can also look in the textbook for the
explanation as well, and of course, you can ask me in office hours  or more explanation, if you hold up real quick, OK, now we're moving onto a new chapter.  Now, we're going to get to the analysis part. So analysis, as I've said before, is a study of limits, real analysis is a study of limits that has to
be able with real numbers. So let's get to our first notion of a limit, and that is the limit of a sequence of real numbers.  and series, so what is the precise definition of a sequence of real numbers, a sequence of real numbers,  that precisely a function x from the natural numbers
into R, just a function, it doesn't have to be bijective, surjective, surjective, injective, injective, anything, it's just a function from the natural number star. So that's precisely what a sequence of real numbers is. Now, we typically don't think of a sequence as a function.  by x sub n and the associated sequence by this curly brackets, n equals 1 to infinity, or we might not even write
the n equals 1 to infinity part, or just  start listing them. So let me quickly say that, although, so again, a sequence unambiguously defined is a function from the natural numbers to real.  think of a sequence, even though, again, it's defined as a function as just an infinite
listing of elements of R, the first element, the second element, the second element, the third element, and so on, and they don't have to be different.  sequence in terms of what is the function, this is x of n equals 1 for all n. But again, I will not think of really a sequence as a function, just as we never thought about functions as a certain
sub-set of the Cartesian product of two sets, you should really think of these as just a list of real numbers.  And when we refer to them, we'll either write them like that, or with curly brackets around an
expression for x sub n. So for example, if I were to write this, this means this is the sequence given by 1, 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1  and so on.  So here's another definition.  So a sequence is bounded if, in some sense, it doesn't
run off to arbitrarily large values.  bigger than or equal to 0 such that for all n in the natural numbers, xn is less than or equal to b, in absolute value.  these are bounded, why? Because every element in this, and I, I should not say
element, but every entry in this sequence is equal to 1, so it's bounded by 1, and every entry in this sequence is less than or equal to 1, so it's bounded by 1 in absolute value, is also positive, so they're both bounded.  a sequence, written minus 1 to the n, so now, right, equals, although this shouldn't, this doesn't mean anything, I'm just going to write it, write it, or start listing the entries, minus 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, this is also bounded, because  the absolute value of minus 1 to the n is 1, so that's
bounded by 1 for all n. So what's a non-example?  So I should say, this is bounded, and other y's I refer to x sub n as unbounded.  that were to ask you to prove this, you would have to show, and this is also a good first
exercise, what does it mean to be unbounded? So I said this at one point, that if you come across a reasonably interesting definition, you should look up or try to come up with examples, and typically, when you do come up with examples, you should come up with non-examples, and what that requires you to do is negate the definition  OK, what does it mean for something to not be that? So even though I'm saying that if it's not bounded, I call it unbounded, I haven't actually written a mathematical statement to this
effect on what this means, so let me make this right here as a remark. So a sequence is unbounded. So if it doesn't satisfy that definition.  So we need to negate this definition. The definition says this is bounded if there exists a b bigger than or equal to 0 such that this holds for all n. Now, when I negate a there exists, that becomes a for all. And when I negate a for all, that becomes a there exists. And then I negate this condition. So the sequence is unbounded if for all b,  bigger than or equal to 0, there exists a natural number in n such that xn in absolute
value is bigger than b. Now, using this, so this is, if you like, you can take that as a second definition, or it's not really a definition, since it's just the negation of the first definition  why is this set unbounded because of the Archimedean property?  n such that n is bigger than b, which is exactly what we wanted to prove, because in this
case, x sub n is n is n, is unbounded.  OK, now, what does it mean for us to have a limit of a sequence, what does a limit of a sequence mean?  x sub n converges to real number x in R if the following condition is satisfied if, for every
epsilon positive, there exists a natural number of capital M such  for all n bigger than or equal to capital M, xn minus x, absolute value is less than epsilon. Now, remember, the absolute value is meant to be
something like a distance. So what does this say, if I give you a little bit of tolerance, epsilon, and you go far enough out in the sequence, then the distance between that entry in the sequence  close to each other. OK? Let me finish stating the rest of this definition that we'll do a little more discussion.  Otherwise, we say it's divergent.  I mean, it is this unique ordered field with at least upper bound property, but when you think about the real numbers, think of it as you've always thought about it as just the
real number line. So what does this definition mean? It means that a sequence converges to some x if, for every epsilon,  I can do the following if I look at if I give you an epsilon, and you go on either side of x, epsilon
emount, then you should be able to find a capital M so that if you look  get entries in your sequence x sub n for n bigger than or equal to M, there in this guy. So then I should have x sub M there, x sub n plus 1, x of n plus 2, and in general, x sub n should be in there as long as n is bigger than or equal to M. So I should be able to do this for every epsilon.  you should be able to go far enough out in the sequence that all entries in that
sequence are within this tolerance of x.  So, although this is a picture of what the definition means, how should you, you've probably
gotten plenty of experience with sequences when you  or doing calculus, but what does this mean loosely? It means if I look close to x, some little interval
containing x, then all of the elements of the sequence should be eventually in this little interval, or another way to think about it is that as I go on in the sequence,  the entries are getting closer and closer and closer to x. Now, the way one makes these last two intuitive statements,
precise is by this definition.  for all n bigger than or equal to capital M, as long as I go far enough
out of the sequence, they're getting close to x. So I hope that's pretty clear.  So again, we have a definition, and it's reasonably interesting, so we should do examples, and then also negate it.  I do want to just prove a very simple fact about convergent
sequences, namely that if I have a sequence which converges to x, then x is the only thing that sequence can converge to. I cannot have a convergent sequence which converges to two different things.  maybe also getting closer to something closer to something
other than x. So I just want to prove that real quick, and then we'll do examples and a negation of this definition, so following theorem, and so I'm going to state first the theorem that has nothing to do with sequences, but is a nice way if you want to show two things are equal.  show they're smaller than anything, so the first theorem that I'm going to
state is if x and y are in R and for all epsilon positive, x minus y is less than epsilon, then x equals y. This is not a surprising statement. If I have x and y in the distance between them is arbitrarily small, then they have to be the same thing.  So what's the proof? Suppose x, y is in R, and for all epsilon positive, x minus y is less than epsilon. So now I want to prove x equals y. So let's assume that this does not hold and arrive at a contradiction.  goes x is not equal y, then remember we proved that the absolute value of something is 0 if and only if that thing is equal to 0, and it's always
not negative, so x not equal to y means the absolute value of x minus y is less than is bigger than 0,  assumption for epsilon equal to x minus y over 2, and get, which implies if I just subtract that over, x minus y is less than 0, so 1 1 1 1 1 1 1,
half is less than 0 or, and that's a very false statement. We've already proven that the absolute value is always non-negative.  real numbers that are arbitrarily close to each other, then they have to be the same. I'm going to use this theorem to prove that y
up to 1 there, y limits, and I have not said, that's what we call x, but y a convergent sequence can only converge to 1 thing.  here is the statement of the second theorem, if x sub n is a sequence, and it converges to x, and it also converges to y, then x equals y. So a convergent sequence can only converge to one thing. And again, like I said, this should be clear, because what's  If I have two things that are not equal and x sub n converges to x, that means as long as I go far enough
out in the sequence, they're supposed to be here in this small interval around x, while if they're supposed to be converging to y, if I go far enough out, there also supposed to be over here, as long as I go far enough out,  places at once ever, and so that's why x must equal y. Although I suppose that now we're doing all the classes online, some are recorded so you can be two places at once, but at least not here.  suppose, suppose, converges to x and y. And I want to verify that for all epsilon positive, the absolute value of x minus y is less than or equal to epsilon.  I have to, that means I do it for arbitrary, arbitrary, absolute, absolute,
absolute get points just for saying let epsilon be positive. Now, I want to show the absolute value of x minus y is less than or equal to epsilon. And we're basically going to do the argument that I just erased.  x, that implies that there exists a natural number M1 such that for all n bigger than or
or equal to M1, x sub n minus x is less than epsilon over 2, y the epsilon over 2, you'll see, magic happens, and since x of n  converges to y, this implies that there exists an M2, natural number, such that for all n bigger than or equal to M2. So again, this is a part that says, as long as I go far enough out, x sub n has to be close to x. Now, this is a part that says, as long as I go far enough out, x sub n has to be close to y.  M2, x sub n minus y is less than epsilon over 2.  I'm going to use these two inequalities and the triangle inequality. Then if I look at the absolute
value of x minus y, this is equal to the absolute value of x minus x sub n plus x sub n minus, so let me not x sub n, but x sub m1 plus m2 plus x sub m1 plus m2,  Now, by the triangle inequality, this is less than or equal to x in M2 plus M1 plus M2 minus y. Now, this is less than epsilon over 2 because M1 plus M2 is bigger than or equal to M1. And for the same reason, since M1 plus M2 is bigger than or equal  of M2, this is less than epsilon over 2, now you see why I divided both of those by 2, because when I add them up, I get epsilon.  a theorem that I proved a minute ago, x equals y. Why did I say that theorem? Because I want to use notation, and I want this notation to be already apparent that it's
consistent, and I'm going to use terminology.  And this is not really a new definition, it's just some
termonology, we call x, the limit of the sequence,  Now, the fact that I've shown only that there's only one guy that a sequence
can converge to is why I get to use the word d. So not we call x a limit of x sub n, it's d limit, because there's only 1, if 1 exists, and write x equals  limit as n goes to infinity of x sub n. So let's pause on negating the definition of what it means for a sequence to be convergent, and let's do a couple of examples of
convergent sequences, proving that they are convergent sequences and computing what they  and at least proving that these sequences do converge to the limit that I'm telling you. So for example, let's look at the constant sequence x sub n equals 1 for all n. So that's the sequence 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, and so on, then I'm just going to write 1, not x sub n, the limit as n goes to infinity of 1 equals 1.  this proof is not very enlightening, so, but I'll show you how it goes. So you're supposed to show what does this mean? This means for every epsilon positive, there exists a natural number capital M, such that if I'm bigger than capital M, this minus the limit should be less than epsilon. So let epsilon be positive, I have to now come up with a capital M, so that x sub n minus x is less  than epsilon, whenever little n is bigger than or equal to capital M. So I'm going to choose
capital M to be 1, I can do that for this sequence. Then if n is bigger than or equal to M, and I look at the entry in the sequence, well, this is just 1, minus 1 equals 0, and that's less than epsilon.  So not very enlightening because capital M equals 1 is good enough. So let's do something a little more, so how about the limit as n goes to infinity of 1 over n equals 0?  and I'm supposed to be proving this epsilon statement in the definition in the
definition in order to be able to state this, which is for every epsilon statement. So I started to prove off with let epsilon be positive. Now I have to find, I have to tell you how to choose capital M to ensure that little n bigger than or equal to capital M implies x sub n minus 0 in this  I will say choose capital M, natural number, such that M is bigger than 1 over epsilon.  you can't just insert statements into your proof, choose capital M to satisfy the
unicorn property and not clarify why you can choose such a natural number that satisfies the unicorn property.  So let me write it this way, such an M exists by the Archimedean property of the natural numbers. I'll say that a few times, if I have to clarify why certain natural numbers satisfying certain properties exist, and then at one point, I'll just stop because it should be clear that I've done it enough
times, you know, why something does exist.  OK, so I choose a natural number, and a natural number M, so that I have this, now I need to show you that this number works.  minus n 0, this is equal to just 1 over n, since little n is bigger than or equal to capital M, this is less than or equal to capital M, which is less than epsilon. And therefore, I've proven what I wanted to prove. So if I just give you a sequence and I ask you to prove that, so this is some discussion,  how do you come up with these proofs, how should the proof typically look if I want to
prove equals L or x? What's the proof of that look like? So the proof should be let epsilon be positive, and then maybe you need to do some explaining,  M so that something, and that such an M exists, probably will be explained there, or in the same sentence. And then the next part of the proof should be showing that this
capital M works.  if n is bigger than or equal to capital M, then you should show that it works by looking at x of n minus x
doing calculation or inequalities and arriving at this being less than epsilon, which is what you're wanting to prove.  I choose M so that this happens. Now, how do you come up with such a capital M? So again, this is just discussion, and maybe we won't get to any more examples.  and we'll call it a day, how do you come up with such a capital M? Why did I choose M in this way? In the end, you can see it here, is that I chose it because if I fiddle around with the thing I want to bound, I ended up with 1 over M, which I can control and make it smaller than epsilon.  So this is a discussion, I guess, within a discussion. Typically, you'll take x of n minus x, your proposed limit, maybe I give you a sequence explicitly or maybe it's an expression
involving some other sequences, and you fiddle around with it,  maybe you write it differently or add and subtract something or multiply it by one in a fancy way, and you'll get some
expression typically involving something involving M. And as long as this expression involving M is simple enough,  capital M so that this thing is less than epsilon. Now, simple enough, for example, 1 over M, I can choose capital M so that this is less than
epsilon by the Archimedean property. If, for example, and that's basically 1 over M or 5 over M or something like that, that kind of exhaust all the simplest ones for now, but if, for example, you ended up with 1 over M squared minus 3  M minus plus 1, plus 100, I would not say this is a simple enough expression to be able to
be able to say choose capital M so that this is less than epsilon without more explanation than what I just gave here. And we'll do some more examples next time to flesh this out a little bit more.  all right, so we'll stop there.