 OK, so we're going to continue our discussion of 1, 2, 1,  of the Riemann interval, which remember from the discussion at the end of the last lecture, is a theory of area underneath the
graph of a function. So what is that theory? The theory is built up as follows, given a continuous  function f, so this is just kind of a refresher on the definition I
introduced last time. Partition is just points between just breaking up the interval from a to b into points into little sub intervals with the norm of this partition being  kind of the length of the longest subinterval, xc, which we refer to as a tag, is just a set of
points with one lying in each of these subintervales. So for me, let's take them all to be the right endpoint of these intervals, and then associated to a tagged partition, which  a pair x and x and xc, we associated a Riemann sum, which is f evaluated at these points,
times the length of the interval, and so if we draw the graph of a function f and say in this picture, this number, this Riemann sum,  be equal to the area of these three boxes here. And so our theory of the
remond integration or our theory of the area underneath the curve is built on the following goal, which is to show that as these partitions get finer and finer, and finer, as the norm of these partitions goes to 0, these  converge to some number, and that number, which we call the Riemann
interpreterp it as the area underneath the graph of f. So the main goal really to start off with is to show that this is a reason that this is actually true, that these Riemann sums do, in fact, converge to some number as they  a finer and finer, for a given continuous function. So that is the main theorem, which I think is going to be the main thing that we proved today, the theorem of the
remon integral, which is the following,  let f be a continuous function from a, b to R, which remember this is the notation we used
from last time, let me move my picture over here, then there exists a unique real number, which we denote  as the usual symbol interval a, b, f of x, dx with the following property, for every sequence of
partitions  xr, xr, xr, such that the norm of these partitions is going to 0 as R goes to infinity. So these partitions are getting finer and finer and finer, if the norm is going to 0, remember the norm is the
linked
or the
sub n  of the longest sub-interval I have. So for all sequence of
partitions with norms converging to 0, we have that the limit of the reman sums exists, and equals this number  which we refer to as the Riemann integral of f. So there's a lot to unpack here. First off, what this number, the
interval from a, b, to f of x, dx, this property that it has is no matter what sequence of partitions you take, as long as they're becoming
becoming finer and finer, this limit actually exists, and it equals the same number, it equals this number,  sequences of partitions, becoming finer and finer, look at the Riemann sums, and those two sequences of Riemann sums converge, and they converge to the same number, which I, again, which we denote by interval a, b, f of x, dx, the Riemann interval of f. And so it's this number, which we interpret as the area underneath the graph of f.  So our main goal for today is to prove this theorem.  numbers such that for all sequence of partitions with norm going to 0, the limit of the
remond sums equals that limit, well, limits of sequences are unique, and therefore, those two numbers have to be the same. So uniqueness is clear, it's really the existence part that we have to prove that there exists a real number so that no matter what sequence of partitions we take, the corresponding  as long as the partitions become the
particians become finer and finer. Now, for now, we're not going to prove this theorem just yet, we need some facts that will be used in the proof. So we're going to put off proving this theorem for a few minutes and first prove some necessary facts.  define a useful metric or number associated to a continuous function called the modulus of continuity, so for f, continuous function, and a to positive,  we define the modulus of continuity, omega f of a to this is equal to the supremum of f of x minus f of y in absolute value, such that the absolute
value of x minus y is less than or equal to a.  Given, if I take any two points, less than or equal to a to n distance, and I look at f of x minus f of y in
absolute value and take the sup over all that, that gives me the modulus of continuity. Now, for example, let's do the simplest example possible, f of x equals ax plus b,  then what do we get f of x minus f of y, this is equal to a times x minus y.  f of x minus f of y in absolute value is less than or equal to, I mean, it's equal to a times x minus y is less than or equal to a times a.  absolute value of x minus y equal to a to the
a, then this will be equality. So what I'm saying is is that for this example, for f equals ax plus b, the modulus of continuity is equal to a absolute value of a times a to the  guy right here, as a to goes to 0, the modulus of
continuity goes to 0 as well. And this is not special to this function, in fact, is true for all continuous functions. So let me state the theorem and then give you an interpretation of it.  continuous on the closed and bounded
interval in a, b, limit as a to goes to 0 of a, the omega f of a to equal 0.  to connect to something we did earlier, which follows immediately from the
definition of this guy that for all x and y, this is true. And therefore, you should think of if I'm trying to make this small, then the modulus of continuity is something that controls  how close f of x and f of y are together. So somehow continuity is controlled by this function, the
modulus of continuity. So if this goes to 0, then if as this goes to 0, this goes to 0, then somehow I'm saying f of x and f of y are very close together. So again, the modulus of continuity is a way of measuring continuity of a function  OK, that's one way to think of it. So let's prove this. This is a limit statement, and what we're going to do is we'll just prove it the old
fashioned way, let epsilon be positive, what do we know about functions which are continuous on a closed and  on at interval, well, they're also uniformly
uniformly continuous. So since f is continuous on this closed and bounded interval, f is uniformly continuous, this means that there exists delta 0 positive, such that,  for all x and y, x and y less than delta 0 implies that f of x minus f of y is less than, you put epsilon over 2, I'm going to give
mine a little space here. So just to recall what we're trying to do here in terms of the definition of what this means, we're trying to show  epsilon positive, there exists a delta positive, such that for all a to, a is actually a positive
number here, so implies omega f of a to is less than epsilon.  OK, so this is what we're trying to prove. We know that for a continuous function, it's uniformly
continuous, and therefore, there exists this delta 0 so that when x minus y is less than delta 0, f of x minus f of y is less than epsilon over 2 for all x y in the interval.  I choose delta to be this delta 0, the delta I need for this, and now let me show that it works. Suppose eta is less than delta, which remember delta 0, then if x minus y is less than eta, which again is less than or equal to eta, which is less than delta 0,  that f of x minus f of y is less than epsilon over 2. Basically, I just wrote what I had right there. And therefore, this implies that epsilon over 2 is an upper bound for the set f of x minus f of y  x minus y is less than eta, which implies that the supremum of this set, which is by definition, so I'm just going to put brackets here, and I hope that's clear that I'm referring to this set here when I put that here, that the supremum of this set has to be less than or equal to
this upper bound,  which is less than epsilon. So we've proven that if a is less than delta, then the modulus of continuity of f of a is less than epsilon.  OK.  of continuity, which remember is the supremum of the difference of f of x and f of y as
on y as long as x and y are bounded by a, that this converges to 0 as a to converges to 0 for all continuous functions. And this is key in showing that the Riemann integral exists for continuous functions.  of how two Riemann sums are comparable, if one partition is finer than the other.  x prime is a subset of x, so this means that x prime, so this is a partition, a breakup of a, b, that
contains all the points of x and more, so it's a finer partition, and we refer to x prime as a refinement of the partition x.  So we have two partitions, 1 is finer than the other, and a continuous
function f, then we can estimate the difference in the Riemann sums, this is less than or equal to the modulus of continuity of f, evaluated at the norm  of the corsor partition times the length of the interval.  define, and then I take a final partition, that's not going to change the
remond sum too much, because remember, this is converging to 0 as the norm of the partition, how fine it is, or you can think how course it is, is going to 0.  So like I said, this partition being contained in the other means this partition has all the points in x and then some more.  So let me draw a picture first, and then I'll define the
concepts that I have. So here we have the partition points of x, and above, I'm going to write, now, I used to write xc, but I'm going to write the partition points corresponding to x prime, so this should be x prime sub L for some L  because remember, this one's can turn, this one is contained in the other. So this partition point will be x prime of L for some L, and then I'll have some other ones, and so on, until I reach the last
partition point from x prime, which  contained in this subinterval from the
partition x, so I let y with a k upper, so this is equal to the partition x sub k minus 1 equals x prime L, L plus 1,  until I get to some partition point x sub m, which equals x sub k. So this is just a part of the partition x
prime contained in this sub interval where these are partition points in x. And then I'm going to write a to this will be the tags that come with these points.  So what I want to draw attention to is that the tag partition x prime, c prime, this is equal to, let me write it this way, since these are sets, what I
mean by, let me write it,  as the union of the tagged partitions, and also, this a to has nothing to do with the a to from before, all right, I'm just
using this as notation. So the full partition of x prime and xc prime tag partition is equal to the union of these smaller partitions  of xk minus 1 and xk as k is k
runs from 1 to k, I hope that's clear. So now let's compare the part of the Riemann sum for xxc on this interval. So remember, somewhere sitting in here is the tag corresponding to the k-th tag for this guy.  this prime, xc prime, and also coming from this interval.  the sum of the Riemann sums sums corresponding to these partitions of these intervals xk minus 1 and xk. So these are not partitions of a, b, but they are partitions of xk minus 1 and xk.  these two this sum up into parts where now I'm looking at what's
happening between each of the partition points, x sub k minus 1 and x sub k, coming from the original  So this is the part of the Riemann sum of x x xc from this interval, minus the part of the Riemann sum for x prime, xc prime, coming from this interval.  And so let me just rewrite this sum here, x sub k minus x sub k minus 1, this is equal to sum from k equals L plus 1 to M, x prime sub j minus x  minus 1, so of the smaller ones that are in there, this is just a telescopoping sum, so all I pick up is
x sub j prime sub m, which is x sub k minus the first one, which is x sub x prime sub L, which is x sub k minus 1, minus 1, minus, and then this is by definition, equal to j equals L plus 1,  x prime j minus x minus x minus 1, so now I can then
absolute value sine on the outside. And then I combine these two, and so this is equal to sum from j equals l plus 1 to k of k minus j  times x prime j minus x prime j minus 1, absolute value, now by the triangle inequality, the absolute value of the sum is less than or equal to the sum of the
absolute value of the absolute value, so to say, my self-writing, I'm going to bring the absolute values inside,  Now, x, now x c sub k and x c sub j, they're both in the interval x sub k, x sub k minus 1. And by what I wrote up there, another way of what follows simply from the definition of the modulus of continuity, this is less than or equal to,  omega f of x sub k, sub k minus 1 times x times j minus x prime j minus 1, and this equals, now this doesn't depend on j, so this is, again, just a telescopoping
sum, so I just pick up,  times x, so that's for 1 p, so now I just add them up.  And so, like I said, this is equal to the sum of these terms that look like this from k equals 1 to n, this is equal to the sum of terms
like this from k equals 1 to n, that's what I wrote up there. And so if I apply the triangle inequality, this is less than or equal to sum from k equals 1 to n of f of xck times xk minus xk minus xk minus 1, minus S  f, a to a, which I have this estimate right here, I've already estimated, so I started off with this, and I showed it was less than or equal to this, so now let me
let me stick that estimate into here,  less than or equal to sum from k equals 1 to n, omega f of x of k minus xk minus 1 times xk minus xk minus xk minus xk minus 1, now the xk's, so another thing which you should notice about the
modulus of continuity is if I have a
sub  something here and then something bigger, this set gets bigger, and therefore, this sup gets bigger. So another property of the modulus of continuity is that it's increasing. This just follows from looking at the definition. There's more points to take a sup over if this thing gets bigger.  So all of these lengths of these subintervales, the distance between
partition points, those are all bounded by the norm of the partition, the biggest one. So this is less than or equal to sum from k equals 1 to n, omega f of norm of x times xk minus  xk minus 1, and now this doesn't depend on k, so I just pick up the sum from k equals 1 to n of this, which is a
telloscoping sum, all I pick up is x sub n minus x sub 0, which is just b minus a, which is the estimate we wanted to prove,  OK, so now I'm going to do something that's sacri-ligences as far as boardwork goes, and I'm going to erase this board and
prove the next theorem on it because I want to keep what I prove, or at least a statement of what I prove around for when we finally tackled a proof of the existence of the remon integral.  in digital form and also in the notes, also I should mention, we're not
following the textbook now, so you have to read the lecture notes or watch the lecture.  where two Riemann sums, as long as one partition is finer than the other, but there's a simple trick which we can now use to
prove how to compare any two Riemann sums for any two partitions.  if xc and now there are any tag partitions, and f is a continuous function, then if I look at the
remond sum of  this guy, and then compare it to the remond sum of the other guy, this is less than or equal to the
modulus of continuity evaluated at the first partition plus modulus of continuity apply to the second partition times the length of the interval.  So what does it say? This says that if I take two very fine
partitions, so that the norms are very small, and therefore, the modulus of continuity evaluated at these norms of small, remember, the modulus of continuity converges to 0 as the argument goes to 0. So if I take two very fine partitions, then the Riemann sums are very close together.  that sequences of Riemann sums do, in fact, converge. So how do we prove this? It's a simple trick using the previous theorem to define a third partition to be the common
refinement of these two.  union it with the second one, and take a new set of tags to be the union of the two tags. So all the partition points of x and x prime, I throw them together to get a new
partition x double prime, and then the tags as well.  then x, backwards, this new partition is finer than x, it's finer than x prime, and therefore, by theorem 2, we have this estimate.  which we can use. So if I look at the difference of the Riemann sums and I add and subtract the Riemann sum corresponding to x
double prime and xc, and then I use the triangle inequality, so I'm doing two steps here,  contract the remunsum corresponding to, and then apply the triangle inequality.  Now, insert this estimate here from theorem 2, where the modulus of continuity
been evaluated at is being evaluated at the corsor partition, so this one is less than or equal to, so x double prime is contained in x, so this is less than or equal to the modulus of continuity
of evaluated at x prime times b minus a, and then for this one,  x prime is corcer than x double prime, this one is contained in x prime, so plus the
modulus of continuity evaluated at x prime times b minus a, and that's what we wanted to prove.  And so what we're going to do is we're first going to come up with a candidate for what the
interval could be, and then we're going to show that that candidate satisfies the conclusion or this property that no matter what partition  and I take with norms converging to 0, the Riemann sums
converge to this number. So first we have to come up with a candidate number.  And for the Greek letter of the
efficientials out there, this is zeta, this be a partition of a, b, with norm convergent to 0 as R goes to infinity.  up with some partition, so this should say be a tag, you can always come up with at least one part of a sequence of partitions, so this is a be a sequence of tag partitions.  So you can always come up with a sequence of tag
partitions of a, b with the norm is converging to 0. Take the first one to be just a whole interval, so just left endpoint, right endpoint, next one, add the midpoint, that's now three partition points, now add the midpoints of the previous two intervals you had, now add the midpoints of the intervals you had before and so on, and that'll build up a sequence of
partitions with norm converging to 0.  So I have this fixed sequence of tag partitions, and I claim that the Riemann sums converge for this guy.  So it converges to some number. We're going to prove this by showing it's Cauchy. Remember Cauchy sequences of real numbers,
always converge.  this completeness property of the real numbers. So there's no other way to do this than using the definition, the epsilon
M definition, so let epsilon be positive.  there exists a delta positive such that if a is less than delta, or should say, so we know that the modulus of continuity for f converges to 0 as a that goes to 0, so for all a
a less than delta, omega f.  of eta is less than epsilon over 2 times b minus a. OK, let me put a star by this guy.  Now, since the norms of these partitions are converging to 0, there exists natural number M0 such that for all R bigger than or equal to M0, the norm is less than delta.  And thus, for all R, bigger than or equal to M0, if I look at the modulus of continuity
evaluated at this norm of this partition, so the norm of this partition is less than delta, and if I stick that  the modulus of continuity, anything I stick into the modulus of
continuity, which is less than delta, which this is, I should be less than epsilon over 2 times b minus a.  So here, we're just using the fact that the modulus of
continuity converges to 0 as the argument converges to 0 and that the norms are converging to 0.  So for show some of Cauchy, we have to now choose M, I'm going to choose
M to be this M0. Then for all R, R prime, bigger than or equal to M, which remember, we've chosen to be M0, we have that the absolute value of S of f  R minus the R minus the R minus the R minus sum, now with R prime, absolute value, this is by theorem 3, which we proved over there, is bounded by the sum of the modulus of
continuities evaluated at the norms, times b minus a,  And now, R and R prime are bigger than or equal to M0, and so by star, so this is this line here, this is by theorem 3,  Now, by star, by our choice of M0, this is less than epsilon over 2 times b minus a plus epsilon over 2, b minus a times b minus a, this is now by star, which equals epsilon.  with respect to this one sequence converges, and so we've proven the claim. Let me call the limit of this sequence something, I'm going to
call it L, in fact, let's call it I for interval, let I be the limit as R goes to infinity  I messed up my notation earlier, sorry about that, the y's and x's and x's and x's should have
been y's and zeta's, so that should have been y, zeta, y, zeta, and then y here, y here, OK? Now that's right.  I is defined to be the limit of these guys. So now we have to do one last thing in order to prove the theorem.  or any sequence of tagged partitions, take the Riemont sums, that converges to I. We've just shown that there is one that converges to I, that's how I's defined. We took one partition, a sequence of tagged partitions, and show that the Riemont sums converge to
some number I. So this number I depends on the partition, which I chose in the beginning.  in fact, has that property that no matter what sequence of
partitions I take, the remunsums converge to I. So that's the second and last thing I need to do to prove this theorem,  a sequence of tag partitions, a true or be coming
come in finer and finer, so with the norm converging to 0, then I want to show that limit as R goes to infinity of the  running to this sequence of partial sums, I mean, partial sums, this sequence of partitions exists and equals this number I, which I obtained from this one sequence of partitions. So once I've proven this, like this is claim 2, once I've proven this, then I'm done.  of satisfies that property that no matter what sequence of
partitions I take, the sequence of remunsums with respect to these partitions converges to that number. Of course, here, I'm calling it I, but we denote it by the integral from a, b of f of x, dx.  using what we have on the board. So remember, I is the limit with respect to this one sequence of
partitions, and now we have an arbitrary sequence of partitions, which we want to show the reman sums converge to this number as well.  the partitions from before, we have by the triangle inequality, if I look at the
remond sum with respect to this arbitrary partition now, subtract I, I want to show this  just to 0. So I'm just going to bound this by something that
converges to 0, and then by the usual argument with the squeeze theorem, that implies this thing converges to 0. So adding and subtracting the remunsum associated to the partition y and z  f of minus f of minus f plus plus now minus I. And so I'm almost there.  b minus a plus S sub f of my sub R,  minus I. Now, the norm of the x sub R, this is converging to 0. So this converges to, since the modulus of continuity goes to 0 as the argument
goes to 0, goes to 0, plus x  And remember, the same thing for this guy, this also converges to 0 plus, and how did we define I? It was defined as the limit of the Riemann sums corresponding to this first fixed partition, and therefore, this thing in absolute value
converges to 0 as R converges to infinity.  the absolute value of this thing, this
remindsum minus I, is bounded by something converging to 0 as R goes to infinity, and therefore, by the squeeze theorem, we conclude that the limit as R goes to infinity of S  So in other words, no matter what sequence of
partitions we take with norms converging to 0, the reman sums converge to this same number i.  work of Riemann, so who was one of the greatest mathematicians of all time, Veierstrass was definitely one of the greatest
analysis of all time, Riemann, just as a mathematician in general, was one of the greatest of all time, not only did analysis,  you know, he applied analysis to number theory, this is a content of the
famous Riemann hypothesis, which maybe you've heard about, which is worth a million dollars, says something about the zeros of a certain function, which then gives you information about prime numbers, but also had deep contributions to the foundations of geometry, or I should say,  foundations of differential geometry, but truly some deep stuff going on. Now we have this notion of a Riemann interval, it's this number interval, a, b, f of x, dx, which has this property, no matter what sequence of
partitions I take with norms converging to 0, the partial sums converge to  this number, so I'm often going to denote, so if you like, this is an alternative
notational use instead of writing f of x, dx, and maybe just write an integral a, b, f,  So this definition of the remun integral looks terrifying if you want to actually
triangle compute it, and it is. So the miracle of the fundamental theorem of calculus is that it gives us a way to compute it, and that's why I'm not doing any examples of computing it right now, but we can still learn about some properties of the remun integral without that,  So now we're moving on to some properties of the interval. And the first is that this is a limiting
process, but this limiting process is linear in f. If I look at Riemann sums, let's say, f plus g, that's equal to the Riemann sum of f plus the Riemann sum of g.  since integration is a limit of this of Riemann sums, then integration should also be linear as well. And that's the first theorem, is the linearity of the Riemann
integration, f and g, R and a, b.  and alpha is in R, then so first off, alpha, f plus g, that's going to be, so that should not be in a, b, this should be a continuous, is the end of a long day.  f plus g, if f and g are continuous, this is a continuous function as
function as well, so its interval is meaningful, and its interval is equal to alpha times the interval f plus the interval of g.  that Riemann sums are linear in the function. So then we just take a limit. Let's take a sequence of tag partitions with norms converging to 0,  as R goes to infinity, then if I look at the Riemann sum associated to alpha, f plus g, it is easy to c
from the definition, this is a sum  from k equals 1 to n, so this is easy to see that this is equal to alpha times the
remond sum associated to f plus that guy, and now I just take a limit.  the limit as R goes to infinity, the left-hand side converges to the limon
interval of alpha, f plus g, the limit as R goes to infinity converges to, because we know limits respect linear operations, the limit of the right-hand side is going to be alpha times the limit plus the limit, and therefore, this is equal to alpha times  and a, and a, b, b, f plus a, b, b, g. OK, so like differentiation, it's also what one would call a linear operator, it takes a function and spit something out, but does it in a
linear way.  it takes a continuous function and it's a continuous function, and it's
pits out a real number in a linear way, in that the interval of alpha, f plus g is equal to alpha times f plus g, just like differentiation, the derivative of alpha, f plus g, if everything's  in some sense, I don't want to say it's not miraculous, it still is a bit of a miracle that exists for all
continuous functions, but it's not as destructive an operator as taking the derivative if you take as your baseline continuous functions.  So with differentiation, you can take a continuous function and not be able to take a
s derivative anywhere, while with integration, if you start off with a continuous function, you can always take its integral. So somehow, integration is a much more smooth or process than differentiation.  you