 OK, so let's continue our discussion of series. So last time, we proved the comparison test at the end of last time, so this was a comparison test.  which is a statement about series with non-negative terms, with 1 being smaller than the other, and 1 of 2 things, or 2 things are true, if I have xn and yn, non-negative with yn bigger than or equal to xn, then the conclusion is, if the bigger  if the series converges, this implies that the smaller series converges, and the second
statement is if the smaller series diverges, then the larger series diverges, and we  also proved not using the comparison test, but for p series that the series 1, sum from n equals 1 to infinity
of 1 over n to the p, this converges, I mean, we did use a comparison test for one direction, I guess. So 1 over n to the p converges if and only if p is bigger than 1.  the comparison test and what we know about the harmonic
series 1 over n, sum of 1 over n. So typically, in applications, you use these two theorems together to say something about series that don't look so simple.  there, plus 2020n, n equals 1 to infinity, so 1 could ask, does this converge diverge? Well, this is a series with non-negative terms. And remember, the bigger thing has to converge to imply that the smaller thing converges, and if the smaller thing diverges, then the bigger thing diverges, so don't  inequalities mixed up. So I have 1 over n squared plus 2020n, this 2020 times n is just making things bigger on the bottom, and therefore, smaller overall, so this is less than or equal to 1 over n squared,  this implies by the comparison test that sum from n equals 1 to infinity of 1 over n
squared plus 2020, n also converges. Now, a mistake I'm sure we've all made at some point is mixing up the inequality and not getting quite the right answer.  it is also true that 1 over n squared plus 2020n is certainly less than or equal to 1 over 2020 times n, which is also less than or equal to 1 over n.  implies the other series diverges, but this is not right, because the inequality is wrong. Remember, if you want to apply the comparison test, you either have to have a bigger series which converges, or a
smaller series which diverges,  OK, here we came up with a bigger series, which diverges, which gives us no
information at all, it's if we have a bigger series, like 1 over n squared, that we know converges, then do we get information about the original series.  calculus, a so-called ratio test. So what is the statement of this? So suppose xn is not equal 0 for all n, and this limit L equals
the limit as n goes to infinity  of x cn plus 1 over xcn in absolute value exists. Then, if L is less than 1, this implies that the series xn converges absolutely  and if l is bigger than 1, then the series diverges. Now, what about l equals 1? There's no information for l equals 1.  you could have a series so that this l equals 1, and you could have a series where it diverges, and you could also have a series where l equals 1 in the
series converges. So for example, if xn equals 1 over n, for example, or even worse, let's say 1,  all n, but we know that the series 1, type of g is, because the individual terms do not converge to 0, they're just 1
the whole time, but for xn equals, let's say 1 over n squared, so the one we just saw a minute ago,  implies L, which is the limit as n goes to infinity of n plus 1 squared over n squared
equals the limit as n goes to infinity dividing through 1 plus 1 over n squared, and this equals 1 plus 0 squared equals 1.  the root or the ratio gives this L is 1 and this
series converges. So again, for the k set L equals 1, we have no information, we can't say anything based on this theorem gives us no information.  So all right, we're going to prove this theorem, basically by, so we're not exactly going to use a comparison test, but we are still going to compare this series satisfying one of these two
assumptions to a series we know, which is namely the ratio test for number 1.  2 out of the way. So let's suppose L is bigger than 1, let alpha be a number between 1 and L.  so we don't even need to do that. So here's 1, here's L. So since xn plus 1 over xn, absolute value,
converges to L, there exists an integer M0, so that's  example number, so that for all n bigger than or equal to M0, xn plus 1 over xn, the absolute value
is bigger than or equal to, so here you could write 1 as this is equal to L plus minus L minus 1. So think of this as being epsilon in the definition  of convergence, and so this is over here, L plus L minus 1, so by the definition of convergence for all n sufficiently large, xn plus 1 over xn in absolute value
have to be in this interval, so it has to be bigger than or equal to 1.  which implies that for all n bigger than or equal to M0, xn plus 1 is bigger than
or equal to xn, and so I could write this as saying that x M0 is less than or equal to x, M0 plus 1 is less than or equal  x m0 plus 2, and so on, but this implies that these xn's cannot converge to 0 as n goes to infinity, because for all n bigger than or equal to m0, they're increasing, and the only way for an increasing
sequence, which is non-negative,  to converge to 0 is for them all to be 0, and we're assuming they're not 0.  And now let alpha be a number between L and 1, so I just want to give
meyself a little bit of room to work as you'll see in just a second. So by the same reasoning as before, so here's L, alpha 1, alpha, I can write as L plus L  alpha minus l, so I should think of this as an epsilon, then since xn plus 1 over xn, an absolute
value converges to l, which is less than alpha, there exists an M0 natural number,  Well, n bigger than or equal to M0, xn plus 1 over xn, an absolute value, is less than or equal to alpha. So here I have alpha just a little bit bigger than L, and if I draw, so this is L minus alpha minus L. So since I have this
sequence here converging to L,  for all, insufficiently large, this should be in this interval,
meaning this should be less than or equal to alpha, OK?  alpha times the absolute value of x sub n. Now, let's see what this means. For all n bigger than or equal to M sub 0, let's say I look at the absolute
value of x sub n, so now this n has nothing to do with these n  and it's just that, so then the absolute value of x sub n is less than or equal to x.  increase that by 1. Well, OK, so let's not be confusing here. Let's make this L, let's make that L. So for all L bigger than or equal to M0 plus 1, so think of L as playing the role of being n plus 1, this is less than or equal to L
x to the L minus 1,  which is less than or equal to x to the l minus 2, now with a square, so what I have here is now, L times alpha, x to the l minus 2, and now let's drop again by 1, and I can do this as long  as this quantity here is bigger than or equal to M, so I get this is, if I keep doing that, this is less than or equal to alpha
to the L minus M0, x to the M0.  OK, and so, actually, since we shifted things,  OK, so now we're going to use this to bound the partial sums of the x sub n.  of x sub n, this is equal to n equals 1 to M0, xn plus sum from n equals M0 plus 1 to M, x sub L, let me just
change dummy variables for the  indexing this. So this is equal to the sum from n equals 1 to M0 of xn. And now, this, I'm going to use this inequality here, so this is kind of a mess.  So this is the inequality that I get from this, and remember alpha's less than 1, plus 1,  OK, so times L equals M0 plus 1 to M, everything's fine, times alpha to the L minus M0 plus 1.  So all I did here was replace this absolute value of x of the of x sub L, L is just a dummy variable for
indexing these guys using this inequality here. So sorry, I kind of messed that up a little bit, but the important thing is that we have this inequality, which somehow tells you this series is not that far from being a geometric series, at least when L is big enough.  So then, when we take an arbitrary partial sum, we split it up into two parts, the
stuff that comes up to this integer M sub 0, which we don't care about, that's just a fixed number, plus this part that we care about, which is after this fixed number M0, and we use this inequality to replace this by x sub M0 plus 1, alpha to the L minus M0 plus 1.  this changing. So we're trying to bound this independent of little m, capital M0, that's just something fixed,
that could be at 1,000. So this is equal to sum from n equals 1 to M0, xn plus x sub M0 plus 1. And now, if I change the variable  Again, so L starts at M0 plus 1 and n's at M, so this is now a sum if I go, so now for the second sum, n is equal to L minus M0 plus 1, so now n starts at 0 and n's at M minus M0 plus 1, alpha to the n,  Again, M is the thing that's changing here, and we're trying to bound this
independently of little M, but now we're in good shape, because this looks like a geometric series, alpha remember is less than 1.  instead of just being a sum from 0 up to M minus M0 plus 1, why not throw all of it in there, and this is equal to n equals 0, xn plus x sub M0 plus 1 times 1 over 1 minus alpha. Remember, alpha is a number that we fixed to be less than 1.  If you try to do what we did before and not fix alpha just a little bit to the left of 1 and try to do everything with 1, you would want to 1 to the n here, and that wouldn't have finished the proof, that wouldn't have closed the proof, but given yourself a little bit of
room, which is why we fixed this alpha.  that's the whole point.  here, given by sum from, and therefore, this sequence of partial sums
sums is bounded, and therefore,  all right, so kind of the simplest application of this  maybe a series that looks familiar, so for all x, so this is, I guess, the theorem slash example, but for all x and R, the
series x to the n over n factorial, n equals 0 to infinity, converges absolutely here,  0 factorial is, of course, 1. And you just use the ratio test. So of the x to the n plus 1, or the n plus first term over x to the n, so absolute value  this equals the limit as n goes to infinity of n plus 1 factorial is equal to n plus 1 times n factorial, so this cancels with that n factorial, and I get x over n plus 1, limit as n goes to infinity of just this fixed number over n plus 1 equals 0, and this is certainly less than 1.  these converges absolutely. So I got a little hung up on exactly the indexes and matching them up precisely, but the important thing to take home from this proof was that when this ratio is less than 1,  series behaves very much like a geometric series for, as the terms get as you go far enough
out in the terms, and this idea of just trying to relate the series to a simple series that you know a lot about, I mean, basically, the only series that you know everything about, namely even how to sum it,  this is how you get this test, and this is also even simpler how you get
the next test, which is the root test.  and suppose this L, this limit, L equals the limit as n goes to infinity of x sub n to the 1 over n exists.  two conclusions, just in ratio test, if L is less than 1, and this implies that this series converges absolutely.  and if l is bigger than 1, then this series converges, no, the series diverges. And again, just like in the ratio test, no information for L equals 1.  you take the same series that we looked at before, let's see, did I leave it up there, yes. So xn, x sub n equals 1 for all n, this limit here, L, exists, it's equal to 1, and that series diverges. If you look at 1 over n squared, and I take this limit, I, again, get 1, but that
series converges,  So for capital L equals 1, we get no information. So in this case, it's even clear how we're relating the series to a geometric series.  in my notes, I proved two first both times, so perhaps I should have
written it 1, 2, I'll know for the future. So suppose L is bigger than 1, and now we're going to show that this series diverges, again, by showing that the terms do not converge to 0.  L, here's 1. So for all n, sufficiently large, x to the n to the 1 over n has to be
inside this interval, and since x to the n, x sub n to the 1 over n converges to L, which is bigger than 1,  for all n bigger than or equal to M0, x sub n to the 1 over n is bigger than 1, which implies
n bigger than or equal to M0, x sub n in absolute value is bigger than by just taking n powers of both sides is bigger than 1. Now, since all of the absolute values of x sub n's is bigger than 1,  this implies that this cannot converge to 0. So remember, I mean, let me remove this absolute value, x sub n cannot converge to 0, y.  And what it doesn't mean, or what it means for it to not converge to x, so xn does not converge to 0 if there exists a bad epsilon
so that x sub n is outside of that interval, is outside of that interval if I go far enough out.  or you could use, so this bigger than 1, in fact, implies that the limsup of x sub n is bigger than 1. Because if I have two sequences, 1 bigger than the other, then the limsup of the bigger 1 is bigger than or equal to the limsup of the other
1, which is 1, and  you're doing in this week's assignment that xn converges to 0 if and only if the limsup of the absolute
values of xn's converge to 0, and this is not, it's bigger than or equal to 1.  OK, so now for the other case that L is less than 1, suppose L is less than 1, then let alpha be a number between L and 1  again, since this converges to L, which is less than alpha, for all n sufficiently
large, this has to be less than alpha.  alpha, which implies that for all n bigger than or equal to M0, x to the n in absolute value
is less than alpha to the n. So here, again, we're seeing this series, if it satisfies these hypotheses, is very much acting like a geometric series.  then for every natural number little m, if we look at the n-th partial sum of the absolute
value, say n equals 1, this is, we split it up again into a part that we don't really care about,  plus an interesting part, remember, little m is the thing that's changing, this should look like a little
m, compared to capital M0, and this is less than or equal to sum from n equals 1 to M0, x sub n, again, this is just a fixed number, plus, now we can put this inequality, n equals M0 plus 1, M alpha to the n,  And this is less than or equal to sum from n equals M0, I'm going to go kind of fast here because I'm running out of space on the board here, maybe I'll write this out in just a minute, but why this is true? And this part here is less than or equal to 1 over 1 minus alpha.  this sum is a finite sum, and it's certainly bigger than if I make the
lower bound smaller and the upper bound larger, and this is just the inf partial sum corresponding to a geometric series with non-negative terms, the alpha to the n, and so that's less than or equal to sum from n equals 0,  alpha to the n, which equals 1 over 1 minus alpha. So that's how we got this term. And therefore, the partial sums corresponding to the absolute value of absolute value is bounded. And therefore, that series with the absolute
value of the absolute value converges, and we have absolute convergence.  Now, let me state a theorem about alternating series. I prefer not to call it an alternating
series test because there's nothing really to test. At least with ratio and root test, you have to compute a limit which might require some work to do.  And therefore, at least to me, that's kind of a real thing that you have to do a little work to test
where there are series converges, and for alternating series, the test is you look at it, and that's it. You don't compute anything, you look at it. So I prefer not to call this theorem about alternating series and alternating series test  So the theorem is for alternating series, and statement is the following, let x sub n be a
monotone  on decreasing sequence, converging to 0. So because this thing is monotone, and
monotone decreasing and converging to 0, so let me put this in parentheses  for xn is bigger than or equal to 0 for all n, I cannot have a monotone
decreasing sequence converging to 0 if one of the xn's is less than 0 because they keep getting smaller.  this is all of the hypotheses, you don't have to compute
anything, then the series minus 1 to the n, xn, n equals, of course, we don't have to start at 1 in particular, but at least for this statement, let's make it precise, sum from n equals 1 to infinity of minus 1 to the n, x to the n, x of n converges.  And we can just say convergence, not necessarily absolute convergence, because, again, if we look at minus 1 to the n, 1 over n, which is 1 over n is a monotone
decreasing sequence converging to 0, that converges, but not absolutely. And if we have x sub n equal 1 over n squared, again, 1 over n squared is a monotone decreasing sequence converging to 0, that would converge absolutely.  So how we're going to do this is it's kind of like how we proved convergence for p series in that we're going to show that a certain
subsequence  subsequence of partial sums converges, and then we're going to use that to show that the
full sequence of partial sums converge.  sequence of partial sums, S sub 2k, so this is just a sum from n equals 1 to 2k, I'm going to show this converges.  this is sum from n equals 1 to M. So how we're going to do this is we're going to show that these partial sums are, in fact, monotone
decreasing and bounded from below, monotone decreasing, basically because  these guys are monotone decreasing and bounded from below by the same
reason. So let's show that for a natural number, if I look at S2k, so this is the sum  equals 1, 2k minus 1 to the n, x sub n, now I have the n equals 1 term, which I can write as minus x, so just writing this out in a certain way, so this is minus x1 plus x2, minus x3 plus, and then n equals 2k is even, so  plus x2k, this is equal to x sub 2 minus x sub 1 plus x sub 4 minus x sub
x sub x sub 3 plus all the way to x sub 2k minus x sub 2k minus 1. Now, this sequence is monotone  to be less than or equal to x sub 2 is going to be
smaller than x sub 1, x sub 4 is going to be less than x sub 3.  this inequality I'm writing here, yet, so I kept everything here, and now I add x sub 2k plus 2 minus x sub 2k plus 1.  So it's smaller than this term, so this term here is less than or equal to 0. And therefore, this thing plus itself plus something that's negative is less than or equal to this thing.  Now, what is this thing on the right-hand side?  k plus 1 partial sum. Thus, this series is monotone decreasing.  So to show that this subsequence of partial sums converges, we just have to show that this
subsequences is bounded or bounded below. If it's monotone decreasing, it's already bounded above by something, so we just need to show it's bounded from below.  for all k, a natural number, let's look at S sub 2k and group term
slightly differently. So this is equal now to, I'm going to write it as minus x1 plus x sub 3, x sub 2, minus x  x sub 3 plus x sub 4 minus x sub 5 plus x sub
4 minus x sub 5 plus so on plus x 2k minus x 2k minus 1, OK?  OK, so this is minus 2 plus x sub 2k. Now, this is right. So this is equal to minus, so again, the x sub n's are monotone decreasing. So x sub 3 is smaller than x sub 2, so this is non-negative.  this is also non-negative because x sub 5 is smaller than x sub 4, so on and so on, so this is also non-negative, so S sub 2k is bigger than or equal to minus x sub 1 plus non-negative term, so 2k, and remember, x sub n's, these are monotone
decrees in converging to 0 and
equal to 0, and therefore, they're all non-negative.  minus x sub 1. Thus, what do we get? So for all natural numbers k, I have minus x1 is less than or equal to S of 2k, and because these are
monotone decreasing, this is always less than or equal to S k equals 1.  And this is, so if you like, S sub 2 is just minus x sub 1 plus x sub 2. So this sequence of numbers is bounded between this real number and this real number, and therefore, it's bounded, and since it's
monotone decreasing, it has to have a limit.  So S sub 2k converges. Let's call this limit something, let's call it S.  a sequence of partial sums converge to S now, which is show this for a long a
sequence of a subsequence of partial sums, let's show it converges to S along the full sequence.  a whole sequence of partial sums
converges to S. And we're going to do this by brute force using epsilon M argument. So remember to show something a limit of something equals S means for all epsilon, there exists a capital M so that for all n bigger than or equal to capital M, S sub M minus S in absolute value is less than epsilon.  positive since S sub 2k converges to S, there exists M0, natural number, so that all k bigger than or equal to M0, S sub 2k minus S, an absolute
value is less than epsilon, right?  Now, we haven't used it all in this proof that the xn's really
converges to 0, we did use that they were non-negative at one point, but now this is where we'll use a converges to 0, because here's the intuition, the S sub 2k's are converging to something.  S, so if I can show the odd partial sums also converge to S, then essentially, I'm done, what's the difference between an even partial sum and an odd
partial sum, well, is just x to the 2k plus 2k plus 1, which is converging to 0. So they don't differ by much, and that's essentially the whole argument right there.  there exists a natural number M sub 1 so that for all n bigger than or
or equal to M sub 1, x sub n is less than epsilon over 2. I should have written epsilon over 2 here, choose M to be the maximum of two numbers  2, M0 plus 1, Mn1, so you'll see why I made these
choices in just a minute. So suppose M is bigger than or equal to M. We now want to show that S sub M minus S is less than epsilon, in absolute value.  then m over 2 is bigger than or equal to capital M over 2, which is the max of these, if I divide by 2, it's
certainly bigger than or equal to M0. And therefore, I use this first inequality, S sub M minus S, which is equal to S 2 times M over 2, minus S. Now, M over 2 is an integer bigger than or equal to M sub 0,  So I can use this inequality, it's less than epsilon over 2, which is
less than epsilon. And now we do odd. So again, m is bigger than or equal  capital M, and there's two cases, M even, and M
even, and M odd, if M is odd, let k be this integer now, since M is odd, M minus 1 is even, divided by 2, that's an integer.  then since m is bigger than or equal to M0, this implies a couple of things. This implies that this integer, so M is just equal to 2k plus 1, so that's bigger than or equal to M, which is bigger than or equal to
n, which is bigger than or equal to 2,  M sub 0 plus 1, and therefore, k, this integer here is bigger than M0, also M is bigger than or equal to M sub 1, as well. M is bigger than or equal to M, and M is bigger than or equal to the max of these two things, so it's
bigger than or equal to M1.  then if I look at S sub m minus S, this is equal to S sub m, so the n-th partial sum is equal to the m minus first partial sum plus the next term, minus S, OK?  1 in terms of the integer k is equal to 2 times k, and now I'm going to take this
S and group it with this guy, and so since k is bigger than  equal to M sub 0, we can use this inequality here, after we do the triangle inequality, so this is less than or equal to
S2k minus S plus the absolute value of this thing, so again, since k is bigger than or equal to M sub 0, I can use this inequality to get this is less than epsilon over 2, plus this guy,  m is bigger than or equal to capital M, which is bigger than or equal to capital M sub 1, I can use this inequality, and this is less than epsilon.  M minus S is less than epsilon, and therefore, the S sub n's converge to S, and I don't think I have enough time to
do this next theorem, so we'll stop there.