 So last time we spoke about the covered sets and induction, this time, I want to ask a question about sets, which turns out is, it's actually quite a
deep question, I mean, I didn't come up with it  Myself, this question is at least 150 years old, probably. So the question that I want to ask is if a and b are sets, or let's phrase  is that this way, at least a little more sufficiently, when do two sets a and b have the same size?  are not finite, meaning there's not 5 of them, there's not 8 of them, but there's infinitely many
mimbers, whatever that means, and I'll actually define what that means, for example, to the natural numbers and the integers have the same size, do the natural numbers and the rational numbers have the same size, what about the rational numbers and the real numbers, even though we haven't defined that,  your notion of the real numbers from calculus. And so this question is, why is it deep? Because it depends on this word here, size, and what exactly that means.  So kind of an answer, this is due to George Cantor, he said that two sets, not an answer, but a way of defining
sides, a way of saying that two sets have the same size, two sets have the same size when  of the two sets, the elements of the two sets can be paired off, meaning, and I will make this much more
precise in a minute or so, what does it mean, what do I mean?  and c, and the set 1, 2, and 3, so this set consists of three letters, a, b, and c, this set
consists of three integers, 1, 2, and 3, they have the same size because I can essentially pair them off, a, so a and 1 go together, b and 2 go together, and c and 3 go together, meaning each one of each member of this set gets  shared off with an element of this set, and every element of this set gets paired off with a
unique element from this set. Now, to make, and so this is goes under the name of the theorem of the  So the way you make, or the way one makes this pairing off business more precise is using the language of functions, and you've been
dealing with functions since you've been doing calculus, so I'm just going to quickly  some terminology that goes along with functions that will be the precise
meaning of this pairing off business that I'm writing here.  that if a and b are sets, then function f, a, b, so functions usually
written as f, colon, a, arrow to b, meaning it takes elements from a into elements from b,  a mapping that, or if you like, an assignment, that assigns to each x in a, a unique element, which we denote f of x, and b,  So one single input x gives me a single output, an input does not give me three outputs. Now, this is what one would call a naive
definition, not necessarily completely unambiguous, but for us, this suffices in the textbook, you can look up a function is unambiguously defined, or as a subset of the  which you would recognize is essentially
essentially describing the graph of the function, but then you never use that definition of gine, and you essentially use this definition when you think about functions and when you prove properties of functions.  let f be a function from a to b, if c is a subset of a, we define a set, so this is f of capital c, so c is not an element of a, it's a subset of a, this is a subset of b,  slightly differently here, this is a set of all y in b, such that there
exists an x in c such that y equals 2 f of x. And I could write this a little more efficiently as this is the set of all elements, f of x, as x ranges over the elements  And if d is a subset of b, we define the set f inverse of d, this is a set of guys that get mapped into d. So I should say this is the inverse
image of d, not the inverse of this function f.  whatever that means for now, does not necessarily always exist. So this inverse image of the set d always exists, this is the set of all
elements in a such that f of x is in d.  let me, so 1, 2, 3, 4, and a, b, c, d, and let's suppose 1 goes to a, 2 goes to a, 3 goes to c, 4 goes to d.  then f of the set 1, 2, this is where, what is the set that gets, so this is the subset of, so this should be, which you should think of as b, a, b and c, and d, and then 1, 2, and 3, this is a.  gets mapped to a, so this is just the set 2, f of the set, let's go with 1 and 3, 1 gets mapped to a, so this should be 1 gets mapped to a, and 3 gets mapped to c.  that the inverse image of a, this is equal to the set of all guys that map to a, this is, well, 1, 1,
maps to a, and 2, maps to a. So this is 1, 2. Now, if I look at the inverse image of a, c, d, what elements get mapped to a, c and d, well, 1, and 2 get mapped  3 gets mapped to c, 4 gets mapped to d, so everything maps into a, c and d, so this is just the original set, or the set a, 1, 2, 3, 4, OK?  or this makes that more precise, let f be a function from a to b, we say that f is injective, or I'll write 1 to 1 should be red 1 to 1, if f satisfies the
following property,  f of x1 equals f of x2 implies x1 equals x2. So n-jective or 1 to 1 means if I take two different inputs, I get two different outputs.  from a logical standpoint, this statement, this statement, this statement is equivalent to the
negation of this statement, the negation of this statement, so equivalently, this means x not equal to x2 implies f of x1, not equal to f of x2.  of different elements to two different elements, but this condition here is typically
easier to verify, or at least simpler to state and verify. So f is surjective, or on to if,  the image of a is b. So let me write that statement out a little bit more, everything in the set b gets mapped to by something from a.  there exists an x and a so that f of x equals y.  with injective and surjective. So, for example, this map that we just drew over here that
sends 1 to a, 2 to b, 2 to a, 3 to c, 4 to d, this is neither injective nor surjective. It's not injective because it takes two different elements to the image in b, namely a, so it  2 to a, it's not surjective because nothing gets mapped to the
element b here. So we've seen that's not surjective, of course, this map, if I take, again, imagine this is 1, 2,  3, a, b, c, d, this map here, this function here that takes 1 to a, 2 to b, 3 to c, this is actually
injective, but not surjective. And then, of course, we could change this slightly.  1 goes to a, 2 goes to b, and 3 goes to b, then this is surjective, but not injective.  that's here, a, b and c, 1, 2, 3, a to 1, b to 2, c to 3, this is a bijection, bijective. So if I say something's an injection or surjection or bijection, that just means it's a map that is injective, surjective or bijective,  respectively.  definition, so this is really, there's not much to this definition, but just
defining a couple of related functions that are related to a given function, if f goes from a to b, g goes from b to c, the composition g of f  is the function, which goes from a to c is defined by g of f of x equals g of f of x.  So this is the composition of two functions. I didn't write the word composition, but this is g of f means the
composition, or is referred to as a composition. If f is bijective, then we define the inverse function to f, b to a, by the following, if y is in b,  then f n, f n, f of y and a is the unique element in a, such that if I take this element,
stick it into f, I get back y.  only exists for bijective functions, or at least is only defined for bijective functions, keep that in mind don't confuse
that with the inverse image of sets. Although those two notation's look the same, you have an inverse f to the minus 1, f to the minus 1, if it's a function, that is the inverse function,  minus 1 of a set, that means the inverse
image of that set as defined over there. So bijections, meaning bijective functions, what we mean when we say two sets can be paired off, it's what we mean when we, at least what cantors answer to that original question  plus when the two sets have the same size, so this is the notion of
cardinality that I alluded to, so we say two sets, a, and b,  have the same cardinality if there exists a bijection or a bijective function, f from a to b.  And so let me just make some notation here, so this is not really new objects I'm defining or
opposite, this is just some notation. So when two sets have the same cardinality, we write  So this is just a short-hand way of writing that two functions have the same
cardinality. You should not necessarily think this means taking the absolute value of a set, that doesn't mean anything.  if a has the same cardinality as the set 1, 2, 3, up to n, we write a equals n.  write a, so if there exists an injective function, or I will often say either function or map, you should take those as a
sinonymous, there exists an injective function, f,  if there exists an injective function, f from a to b, we write this thing, again, do not read this as taking the absolute value of
some set, and that absolute value is less than or equal to the absolute value of the other set, because that's meaningless, we haven't said what that means, even.  a short-hand notation. And if there exists an injection from a to b, but they don't have the same
partinality, we write  this. So even though this notation of these absolute value things being on the
outside of the set makes you think absolute value, or shouldn't be interpreted as absolute value, it's OK to think as a certain ordering being there, as 1, as sort of a, having smaller size,  b. We write this because there being an injection from one set to the other,
means I can pair off elements of a with some elements of b. Maybe I don't get all of the elements of b, but I can pair off some of the elements of a with some of the elements of b.  than or equal to the size of a, b, c, d, because we found an injector an injector map from the first
set to the second set. This third map would say that the size of the set a, b, c is equal to 3, written here, or shorthand written here.  is, so from first map, this says that the set of 1, 2, 3 in our short-hand notation, absolute value, as is less than the
size of a, b, c, d. So don't think of these as saying the absolute value of its best and maybe think of this as saying the size of.  from function, from one set to another, then the size of a is less than or equal to the
size of b, if the size of a is less than or equal to size of b, but the size of a and b are not the same, we write the size of a is less than the size of b.  Now, I'm not going to prove this, it goes a little bit
beyond the scope of this class, but let me just say that this ordering, this inequality, these symbols that we're writing, does bear some sort of semblance to the ordering of real numbers, and that if I have two real numbers, one is less than or equal to the other, and vice versa.  less than or equal to b, and b is less than or equal to a, then a
must equal b, that is, in fact, true also for this elementary notion of size of sets.  no bigger than n, and n is no bigger than the size of a, then a should have n elements. But it's takes a little bit more to prove for sets which are not finite. So I forgot to write this down. We also say that the size of a is equal to the
size of this finite set 1 through n, we say a is finite.  So this theorem that I'm stating here is the counter-shoulder Bernstein theorem, which states that if the size of a is less than or equal to the
says of b and the size of b  is less than or equal to the size of a, then size of a equals the size of b. So again, if you're thinking of these in the context of real numbers, 1 being less than or equal to the other, and vice versa, of course, that implies that those two real numbers are equal to each other. But we're not talking about real numbers, again, this is just a short-hand notation for saying there exists a bijective  map from a to b. This means there exists a bijective map from a to this set. This means there exists an injective map from a to this set. So this is not a statement about real numbers.  So finite sets are set set that you can count if you had n fingers. Now, we would like to be able to define what it means to be able to count a set. So what I mean by count a set, meaning if I had infinite time, I could go through the set  counting them 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, and so on. I don't need to go any more. So what does that process of counting mean? That means for each element of the set that I'm trying to count, I can pair it off with a natural number, 1, 2, 3, and so on.  So if a has the same size as the natural numbers, meaning there exists a bijection from a to the
natural numbers, then we say a is countably infantite.  if a is finite, or countably, I also use a lot of short-hand, so it's not clever, so you should just be able to
be able to sound, like if you just sound that out, you'll get what word I mean, countably,  we say a is countable. So countably infinite means I need all the natural numbers to be able to count off the
elements of the set a, countable means maybe I stop after some point, and I've counted all them, so a is finite, or it's countably infinite. Otherwise, if a set is not countable, we say it's uncountable.  OK, so let's take a look at a couple of countable sets that maybe don't come  off is being countable, the set of, actually, that's a homework problem, the set of even integers is countable, the set of odd, so I said, integers  maybe I should have said natural numbers, the set of odd natural numbers is countable. So in fact, so this is just an aside. So these are two disjoint subset sets that make up the natural numbers  even in odd natural numbers, and they both have the same
sides as the set that they make up. So it's almost like saying the cardinality of the natural numbers is twice the cardinality of the natural number, since you would think that the size of n should be the size of this set plus the size of this set, since they're disjoint and they make up the set, but that's not how a cardinality  works, you don't just add cardinalities to get the cardinalities, but so this is kind of a subtle, an interesting thing about cardinalities and so Richard Feynman, who won the Nobel Prize in the 60s for his work on QED,  there are twice as many numbers as numbers.  we have to be able to find a bijective function from this set to this set, or from this set to this set, one or the other.  let me pause this just for a minute, and let me make a few
comments called cardinality, which maybe I should have. So this you can think of is a little theorem. If I have two sets, a has the same size as b,  then B has the same size as a. So remember, what I just said in English is not exactly what those symbols
means, remember, this means there exists a bijection from a to b. This means there exists a bijection from b to a. So what is the proof of this statement?  then there exists bijective map, bijection, bijective function, f from a to b.  then what would be a bijection going from b to a, that would just be the inverse. So this is not the inverse
image of sets like we describe at the actual inverse, which we defined over there.  So B has the same size as a.  one other statement, so if a and b have the same size, and b and c have the same size, so again, a, b and c are sets, I should have written that at the beginning, but from this
context you should understand that a, b and c are sets, then a and c have the same size.  So let's do a proof of that. So let's start with the hypothesis, meaning a has the same
sizes b and b has the same size of c. So what do these two statements mean?  terms of the definition, that means there exists bijection from a to b, and a bijection from b to c.  So perhaps I should have said a few more words about why this is true. So what I'm going to leave this as an exercise, just to pause the lecture and do it yourself, and what I'll write shortly for this case, so I'll
actually prove that the thing I'm going to define is a bijection that should help you.  So let me draw over here off to the side, we have, again, 1, 2, 3, a, b, c. So think of this as f, this is my set a, this is my set b. And then I have alpha, beta, gamma, and a gets mapped to alpha, b gets mapped  beta, c gets mapped to gamma. So what would be the map going from a down to the set c? Well, perhaps the composition, 1 gets mapped to a, which gets mapped to alpha. So 1 gets mapped to alpha, 2 gets mapped to beta, 3 gets mapped to gamma. How do I build this function out of the things that I know, namely this f in g? Well, this function going from a to c is just a
composition of these  two functions. So this is off to the side, this is not a
part of the proof, let h go from a to c be the function g of f of x  So I claim that this function is a bijection. So we want to prove that it's 1 to 1 and 1 and on 2.  So suppose, so this is the part where I'm going to put this in parentheses,
meaning what we're doing now, so we're going to prove that h is 1 to 1, so that means we have to verify the definition that I've erased.  first show, h is 1 to 1. And what this means, according to the definition that I'm
now writing over, if h of x1 equals h of x2, then x1 equals x2, so this is what we want to prove, this is a definition  of h being 1 to 1. So let's start if h of x1 equals h of x2, then in terms of how we've defined h, which is g of f of x, so the composition, and this means g of f of x1,  2, that's just what h is. Now, this statement here, now g we know is a bijection. We know g is 1 to 1. And since g of something equals g of something else, and g is 1 to 1, this implies that f of x1 equals f of x2,  this is since g is 1 to 1. So starting with this, in the definition of
h being the composition, we conclude that f of x1 has to equal f of x2 because g is 1 to 1. Now, since f is also 1 to 1, we are assuming that f n g are bijections, since f is 1 to 1, this implies  x1 equals x2, since f is 1 to 1, and this is what we wanted to prove. We wanted to start with assuming h of x1 equals x2 and
proved x1 equals x2, which is what we've done. So thus, we've proven that h is 1 to 1. Now we have to show that it's surjected  if that is on to, h of a equals c. And again, I'll write out what this means, this means for all y and c, or let me call it z, there exists an x in a, such  h of x equals z. Now, we use the fact that f and g were injective to conclude that the composition is injective, so it's the reason that we're going to use the fact that they're both
sejective to prove that h is surjective. So we need to prove that for all z and c, there exists an x in a, such that h of x  So let z be in c, now we need to find some x and a that gets mapped to z. We'll use that g and f are both surjective.  We have some element of z, and we know that since g is surjective, there's some element in b that gets mapped to g by g. But now since f, going from a to b is surjective, there exists some x, which maps to y, and then that's the whole argument.  I drew this picture, but now I just need to turn it into
English using the properties and assumptions that I have since g is surjective, there exists a y and b such that g of y equals z.  since f is surjective, there exists an x in a so that f of x equals y.  of f of x, which is equal to g of y, which is equal to z by how we've defined y, remember g of y equals z, how we
found y, and how we found x, remember f of x equals this y. And therefore, this map h is on to, and therefore, h is a bijection proving this theorem.  you, in your many exercise to prove that the inverse of a bijection is a bijection.  even natural numbers has the same size as the natural numbers, has the same
cardinality as the natural numbers, and the same for the odd one. So I'm just going to do the odd ones, again, this will be a small exercise for you to prove number 2, the statement for the odd one, so I'm going to do the even 1, and you can do the odd ones, you should, if you plan on setting more math, get used to  the instructor, professor, research paper writer, textbook author, giving out little
exercises to make sure that you're following along and that you can do some minor task at some point during the discussion.  I want to show that the natural numbers has the same size as the even natural numbers, which is the same as this statement by that first
theorem I wrote up there.  to the set of even natural numbers, this should be not too bad. So, again, this is off to the side, this is not part of the proof.  what would be the map going from these guys to these guys? Well, I mean, there's several you could choose, but maybe the simplest is 1 gets map 2, 2 gets map 4, 3 gets map to 6, 4 gets map to 8, 5 to 10, 6 to 12, and so on and so on.  let f be the function into the even natural numbers defined by f of n equals 2 times n.  formally writing the function that takes 1 to 2, 2 to 4, 3 to 6, 4 to 8, and so on and so on. I claim f is bijection, so I have to show that f is 1 to 1 and on 2.  So that means that I have to assume f of n1 equals f of n2 and conclude that n1 equals n2. So let me actually write out what this means, again, for you to say that f is 1 to 1, is 1 to 1, i.e. if f of n1 equals f of n2, then n1 equals n2. But this is easy to verify for this function that we've written down.  because if f of n1 equals f of n2, so remember, this is what we want to show. So to show it, I start with my assumption, and I need to conclude n1 equals n2. So suppose f of n1 equals f of n2, my assumption, my hypothesis, I need to
conclude n1 equals n2.  then this implies by the definition of f, 2 times n1 equals 2 times n2, which by algebraic
of just eliminating the 2, n1 equals n2, which is the conclusion that I want. So I've proven the statement that if f of n1 equals f of n2, then n1 equals n2, therefore, f is 1 to 1.  show f is onto surjective. Now, write this out again, i.e., for all elements that are n that are an even number, there  such that f of n equals M. Now, let M be an even integer, and so not to confuse this, let me write 2 times k.  then, and let's do that here as well. Again, this is not changing anything, this is just changing the letter I'm using to
describe to set, which is inconsequential, but I don't want you to get the false impression  doing anything at all. So suppose I have an even integer, then there exists, simply by the definition of this set, there
exists an n natural number so that m equals 2 times n, then f of this natural number, which is 2 times n, equals m,  I get something that maps to M, therefore, f is on 2, therefore, f is a bijection, and the two sets have the same
cardinality.  So let's where should I write?  Now, using this, and I'll probably put this in the homework, I mean, one can also show, I should say, using this, but one can also show that,  the integers have the same size as the natural numbers, which again, is a little bit surprising, since the natural
numbers are a strict subset of z. So what's the proof? So I'm going to draw a picture, then I'm going to write down the function, and then I'm going to leave it as,  homework that for you to verify that this function is 1 to 1
1 and on 2. So let's say there's as many natural numbers as I want to write,  And as many integers as I want to write, so what would be a way of mapping the integers in a 1 to 1 and on to
fashion on to the natural numbers?  1 just to get 0 out of the way. And from then on, now we just need to find a way to map the positive
indegers and the negative integers on to the natural numbers bigger than 2. And in some way, mentally, we should feel like we can do this, because we did it over there,  So how about we take 1 to 2, 2, 2 to 4, 3 to 6, 4 would then go to 8, and we'll take 1 to 3, minus 2 to 5, again, crossed.  would get sent to 7. So you see that the positive integers get mapped to the even natural
numbers, and the negative integers get mapped to the odd natural numbers bigger than 1. So I'm not even going to write the proof, this will be part of the homework.  it is a bit surprising that there are twice as many numbers, not too surprising, since these
subcets, if you picture them as I've been doing a subset of the real line, they're kind of discrete, so you should be able to count them, what is more surprising is whether or not you can count subset, and some  And for example, what about the rational numbers? So this is a theorem that, and let me just look at those positive
rational numbers. In fact, I could take all rational numbers, but for the statement of this theorem, if I look at those rational numbers, with which are positive,  then this has the same size as the natural numbers, you can count the positive
rational numbers, which is just a bit crazy to me because here, at least for, let's say, the integers, once I'm at an integer, I can move to a next biggest 1 and count that 1 in some way.  And so that kind of makes it believable that I can count the integers, the integers have the same
says as the natural numbers, even though at first glance, it looks like there's twice as many.  and then sort of moving to the next big one, that you can't do that now. So now it's a little bit up in the air at least, whether or not you can count the
rational numbers, and what I'm saying is that, indeed, you can, and this will be part of the homework, I will at least give you an idea of how the proof will go, what we will actually be able to write down  based on a simple fact, so let me not write down proof, but let me write down or mark. So we'll actually be able to write down a map based on one simple fact, which is this fundamental
theorem of arithmetic, which says that this is just discussion now, more stuff will be written in the homework about this,  try to follow along. So the fundamental theorem of arithmetic says that if you have a
positive natural number, you can write it in a unique way as a product of prime numbers. Now, for rational numbers, using that, that means you can write every rational number uniquely as a product of prime numbers, divided by another product of prime numbers, where  numbers up top and the prime numbers at the bottom, the bottom
number and bottom, and the bottom number in common, meaning you've simplified as much as possible, so instead of 15 over 3, it's not good, let's say, 15 over 30, you have 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1.  can be written as some product, so let me not use n notation, but some product
p are 1, the n are n, Q1, S1,  Qm, Sn, where p1, p2 and pn, these are all prime, Q1 up to Qm, they're all prime, Rn, these are all x-sponent positive
natural numbers, so R, j, Sk, these are natural numbers, p1, pn, Q1 to Qm are prime,  jk, Qj does not equal pk. So there's no prime that appears both up here and down here. We've already
simplified that away.  I'm fooling you, 9 halves, which is a positive
positive rational number, this is 3 squared over 2, yeah? I'm not going to do any more, that's it.  this gets mapped to the natural number p1, 2R1, pn, 2Rn times now, Q1 to S1 minus 1, QM2, Sn minus 1. So basically, I map it to the integer that has this expansion in terms of  time numbers, where now the exponents of these prime numbers is even, depending on these
exponents on top and the exponents of this one are odd, depending on this exponent on top. So, for example, 3 squared over 2, this would get mapped to 3 to the 4 times 2.  OK? So what we'll do in the homework is show that this map is, in fact, a bijection.  the terms you will prove in the homework, there won't be two to bad, I will leave enough hints.  actually write down, this is really a corollary of these two theorems here, which I haven't proved, but you will
prove in the homework, so this says that the rationals are countable, all the rationals, not just the positive ones,  We know that, so I'm going to give you a sketch that I sketch it or should I write it all out, running a little bit at a time, but maybe I will just tell you why this is true.  or essentially here, I'm just not going to write it as carefully as I've been
writing down the proofs before, so let me write this as the proof sketch.  have that the size of rational numbers, so let me have the
says of rational numbers, which are negative,  And this, how do we establish this, or instead of
using the same letter, let's say R, since f of Q equals minus Q is a bijection  from the first set to the second set.  element of the second set, and this is a bijection. Thus, since this has the same
sizes the natural numbers, and by that theorem we proved over there, the size of this set is the same as the natural number,  it is countable, then there exists bijections, f going from Q, so the positive
ration of rational numbers to the natural numbers,  and g going from the negative ones, to the natural numbers.  draw the picture yet. So I have these two bijections from the positive
rationals to the integers, this one from the negative rationals to the natural numbers, how do I get a map that goes from all of Q now to the natural numbers?  which goes now from all of Q to the integers by h of x equals 0 if x equals 0, equals f of x if x is positive, and
negative g of x if x is negative, if x is  if, and h is a bijection. So everything up in this point has been completely fine with the exception of me
verifying that this map is a bijection, and this map is a bijection, so that's kind of the only parts that I'm leaving out for you to verify,  So Q has the same cardinality as integers, which we've shown has the same
cardinality as the natural numbers, and therefore, the rationals have the same cardinality as the natural numbers, so they are countably infinite.  So a natural question is, I mean, is there anything bigger than the natural numbers? Because everything I've written down, this has the size of the natural numbers, we haven't really defined the real numbers well enough yet to make any sort of claim like that about the
reverse  real numbers, and now is there just any set that is bigger in size
in the natural numbers, the answer to that was unknown, and it's pretty strikingly yes, in fact.  let me phrase that question. Does there exist a set, such that a has strictly bigger
cardinality than the natural numbers, so a is uncountable?  So to answer this question, this is boundedly, yes, let me first define for a
general object, if a is a set, we define script p of a, this is the power set of a,  this is a set that consists of all subset of a. So this is a set of all sets b, such that b is a subset of a.  the power set, so a is empty, what are the subset of the empty set? Well, there's only one subset of the empty set, the empty set. So even though the empty set has no
members, its power set has one number. If a equals 1, then the power set of a, the set of all subset,  and the set itself, 1, and let's do one more, if a is the set 1, 2, and the power set of a, this is the set, which consists of the empty set, because this is a subset of the set, the set consisting of 1,  or 2, 1, 2. Now, notice something, this set had cardinality, strictly speaking, I should have defined that as being having cardinality 0, yet its power set has
cardinality 1, a has size 1, because it's in 1 to 1, 1, 1 correspondence with just 1, and its power set  two elements, so has cardinality 2, I could count them off, 1, 2. A has size 2, has two elements, and the power set of a has
sides 4, it has four different elements, the empty set 1, 2, 1, 2. So what one can prove in general, and which will appear on the homework,  k as the same has size n, so it's a finite set of
size n, meaning it's in 1 to 1 correspondence with the numbers 1 up to n, then its power set is also finite and has cardinality 2 to the n.  And so a theorem I'll prove next time, which will finish our discussion of
sets and cardinality, and then we'll move on to the real numbers, is this theorem due to Cantor, which says that not just for finite  sets do we have the power set being in some sense strictly bigger than the
original set, but for any set. So this theorem due to Cantor is if a is a set, then the cardinality of a is strictly smaller than the cardinality of its power set. So this definitely answers our question, does there exist a set  with cardinality bigger than the natural numbers, so let me
write this as a remark, in fact, maybe I'll state this as another theorem, which just follows immediately from this getting used over and over again, is that the cardinality of the natural numbers, this is less than the cardinality of the power set of the natural numbers, which  less than the cardinality of the power set of the power set of the power set of the natural numbers, I can now take this as a set and take
it's power set and I get a new set with bigger size, which is less than the power set of the power set where how many do we have now of the power set of natural numbers, and so on.  And, and formally, this means there, there's an infinity of infinity of
infinity of infinite number of infinite number of infinite sizes.  one getting strictly, in some sense, strictly bigger than the
previous size, and maybe you're wondering, there's one more question that's sandwiched in between here, pun intended, is let's look at this first guy,  does there exist set a such that it has size bigger than natural number, so it's uncountable, but has size strictly smaller than the
power set of the natural numbers, and this question is called the  Continuum hypothesis, because it is independent from one of the standard, axiomatic
treatments of set theory, but we will not touch this question. This is the scope of this class, but it's an interesting question that's out there that people just don't know.  I'm going to
show you,