 So last time, we finished by proving Bolzano's intermediate value theorem,  which states that a continuous function achieves all values in between the
function evaluated at the end point.  I take a value y between f of a and f of a, so either f of a is less than f of b and y is in between is bigger than f of a
and less than f of b or f of a is bigger than f of b, but y is still in between them, then there exists c in the interval a, b so that  f of c equals y. So every value in between f evaluated at the end point is a g. And I drew the picture, along with this a, b, f of a, f of b, and that could be the function, and if we take  anything in between, then there has to be some c so that f of c equals y. At least in the picture I've drawn, there's three different
guys, but there's always at least one. And then the last thing we talked about at the end of last lecture was that the image  a bounded closed and bounded interval by a continuous
function is, again, a closed and bounded interval where E corresponds to the absolute max of f, and f corresponds, so that I shouldn't call this f, since we already have f being  let's make it d corresponds to the absolute min of f. So this is what we proved last time is that f of if f is continuous,  there exists e, d, d, and r such that the range of this closed and bounded
interval is, again, closed and bounded interval. So f is very well-behaved on closed and bounded intervals, and we'll see another way in which continuous functions are well-behaved on a closed and bounded
interval in just a second.  Now, a simple application of the Bolzano intermediate value theorem is the following, really, it's an application of that theorem that I label the bisection method, but let's chalk that up to the Bolzano intermediate
value theorem, which is the following that if f of x is  any odd polynomial, then f has at least 1 real root.  by the fundamental theorem of algebra, every polynomial has exactly in roots, in
corresponding to the degree of the polynomial, but these roots can be complex value. But for odd polynomials, there must be at least one real root, and this is a consequence of the Bolzano intermediate
value theorem, but instead of proving this theorem in its full generality, let me just give you a  So let's take f of x equals x to the 2020, 2021, minus x to the 2020 plus, I don't know, what's today, I think the 25th or 24th, I don't know, 10, 25x, minus
  300, so what's the point? As long as I plug in a big enough x, I will this will swamp everything here.  100,000, I leave it to you to check that this is positive, because this will be 100,000 to the 2020 minus 100,000 to the 2020, or 2021, and then plus this, which will be positive, minus 300, this doesn't matter. So what really matters is this big guy, or this guy with the largest power, will swamp all the other ones and
eventually be positive if I  in a large enough positive value. And, likewise, in fact, for this guy, if I stick in a negative value, then I get something very big, but now with a minus sign, which will again, swamp all these
earlier guys, in fact, I don't have to choose minus 100,000, if I just stick in 0, I will get minus 300, which  you can check that if I stick in minus 100,000, this will still be negative. Thus, by the intermediate value
value theorem, there exists a c in 100,000, 100,000 so that f of c equals 0.  because 0 is something in between f evaluated at these two end points.  that's negative, and then you apply the intermediate value
theorem to be able to find a root. Now, of course, one other thing we did with the statement of the midmax theorem was, can we drop any of the assumptions on this theorem  And you can see that the example is no, so question is if f from a closed
and bounded interval is not continuous, and let's say f of 0 is less than 0, f of a,  f of b is bigger than 0, then does there exist c, a, b, such that f of c equals 0?  does not exist a point in between so that f of c equals 0, simply as being, I'll just draw a picture, let's
go from minus 1, 1, 2.  x minus 1, and this is for x not equal to 1, and let's make it a half there. So this function looks like 1, 1, 1, and there.  So x is between 0 and 2. So you see f of 0 is equal to minus 1, that's negative, f of 2 is equal to 1, it's positive, but there exists no c in between so that f of c equals 0. So what's the point I'm making? We really do need this hypothesis that the function  is continuous for this theorem to be true. If you drop that hypothesis, then the
theorem is no longer true.  OK, so now we're going to move on to a new concept called uniform continuity. And before I do this, I'm going to rewrite the definition of continuity.  So this is an old definition, but I want to highlight a specific aspect of it. So this is me writing the definition of a continuous
function, again,  So a function f from a set S to R is continuous, so we said that means it's continuous at every point, meaning if for all c in S, it's continuous at c, which means for all
c in S, which means for all c  all epsilon positive, there exists a delta, now this delta, and we saw this in
examples that we did prove in continuity, this usually depends on epsilon and c, the point where I'm looking at, such that for all x and S,  x minus c less than delta implies that f of x minus f of c is less than epsilon. So this is, again, a bit of a review, but I just want to show you that in general, when we verify that a function is continuous on a set, we have to show it's
continuous at every point in the set, and that means for every  the epsilon there exists a delta, but this delta can usually
depends on epsilon, but it can also depend on the point c, which is where we're checking continuity at.  equals 1 over x is continuous. So proof, we have to show that for every c in 0, 1 for all epsilon, there exists that.  again, I mean, since this is kind of a review, I'm not going to go through the
process of really the thinking behind choosing this delta, I mean, there's calculations you do off to the side to try and get this delta, but let's choose delta to be the minimum of c over 2 and c squared over 2 times epsilon.  what I want to, again, emphasize, this delta,
depends on c, the point we're looking at, and epsilon. So I claim this delta works, suppose x is in 0, 1, and x minus c is less than delta.  then absolute value of x, this is equal to the f, this is by the triangle inequality, so let me
write it this way, c, absolute value, is equal to c minus x plus x, which is less than or equal to c minus x  which is less than delta, which is less than or equal to the minimum of these two, so it's
certainly less than or equal to c over 2 plus x, and now c and x, these are in 0, 1, so they're all positive.  let's go to the next board. So if I subtract the c over to the c over 2 over to the other side, I get that c over 2 is less than x. So as long as x is in 0, 1 and x minus c is less than delta, this should not be a shock.  1, c, c over 2, 3, c over 2. And so if x is in this interval, it's certainly
bounded away by c over 2. Or if x is in here, then x is certainly bigger than c over 2. And now we look at f of x minus f of c  this is equal to 1 over x minus 1 over c equals c minus x over x times c, which is less than delta over x times c.  less than x is bigger than c over 2, so if I take 1 over that, I get 1 over x is less than 2 over c, so this is less than or
or equal to 2 delta over c squared, and delta is the minimum of now c over 2 and c squared over 2 times epsilon, so this is less than or equal to 2 over c squared times c squared over 2, epsilon equals epsilon, so I just went through the proof of continuity for 1 over x  which using better machinery we could have proven, but I did this to highlight this point that showing continuity of 1 over x on 0, 1, that in showing that this delta that you are choosing depends on the point you're looking at.  So what the definition of continuity says is for all c, for all epsilon, you can find a delta
depending on epsilon and c. Now, uniform continuity removes that necessity of delta depending on c. And I'm going to make a possibly bad analogy in just a minute, but first, let me write down the definition  of uniform continuity, let S be subset of R, f going from S to R, we say f is
uniformly continuous,  on S, if for all epsilon positive, there exists a delta, depending only on epsilon, such that for all x c and S with x minus c less than delta, we get that f of x minus f of c is less than epsilon.  So a function being continuous means that for all epsilon, you can find a delta, depending on one of these
points, depending on c, so that if I have this, then I have this. Uniform continuity says you can find a delta that works across the board.  a try and make an analogy that hopefully I don't have to
cut out of this lecture, but it's a bit like this, let's take a trip down memory lane and imagine being at a party.  now, in order for me to hear this person's conversation,
depending on how loud they talk, I have to be close enough to be able to hear them.  that person just whispers, and I have to be almost nose to nose to be able to
be able to hear them, that's a bit like a function being continuous. The threshold of hearing what they're saying is the epsilon, and I have to change my delta depending on what point I'm at so that I can hear them.  around the same level, speaking at the same
allowance, so I just can be within, say, one foot of everybody and be able to understand them. I go to this person, if I'm within 1 foot, I can hear them well, if I go to this person, I hear, and within 1 foot, I can hear them well, and so on.  So this is a reasonably
interesting definition, so we should see examples and negate it. First off, you should be able to convince yourself that a function that's uniformly continuous, is actually continuous, I'm not going to write that the proof of that down, it follows essentially  And so let's look at a function which is uniformly continuous. So the function f of x equals x squared on the interval 0, 1,  is uniformly continuous. So what's the proof? I want you to notice, I'm going to use in a very
essential way that we're on this closed and bounded interval. So we need to show that for every epsilon, there exists a delta so that no matter what two points, so you like, here's a picture that  along with this, so that if I look at any two points that are close to each other, less than delta, their functions value is within epsilon, and so let's say I'm on interval a, b, but not just this point, I could go over here to two other
point  points that are within delta of each other, and if I look at the function
evaluated at the two points, and then the difference between these two guys is also less than epsilon.  I can hear them just fine. So what a nice trip down memory lane when we can be around other people. So let's show this function is, uniformly
continuous, let epsilon be positive, choose delta to be epsilon over 2. Now, you see, this delta just depends on epsilon,  OK, then if x and c are n0, 1 and x minus c is less than delta, then if I compute the difference x squared minus c squared, this is, I can write as x plus c times x minus c. And now I use the triangle inequality, this is less than or equal  x minus c. Now, these guys are in 0, 1, so their absolute value is
always bounded by 1, so this is less than or equal to 1 plus 1, and then x minus c is bounded by delta, which equals 2 times delta and delta is chosen to be epsilon over 2, so I get epsilon.  out of nowhere, and practice how do you choose delta, this is the computation you do, you take x squared minus c squared, split it, you have this, you can
estimate what you know above by 2 here times delta, so how do you choose delta so that 2 times delta is, say, equal to epsilon, you choose delta to be epsilon over 2.  So let's negate this definition and then look at 1 over x,
once again, and check to see if it's uniformly continuous. We'll show it's not. So the negation f from S to R is not uniformly continuous,  So I saw a little bit of the new Borat movie that came out. So I almost wanted to say, f is uniformly continuous, not, but I didn't, is not uniformly
continuous, if and now you negate the rest of the definition  if there exists some bad epsilon such that no matter what delta you choose, there
exists some bad x and c, and S such that they're close to each other, but the values are not bigger  equal to. So let's revisit 1 over x, this is not uniformly continuous on the open
interval  0, 0, 1. So you see that this function is continuous, but it's not
uniformly continuous. So we just proved that a minute ago that it's continuous. So let me now give you the proof that this function is not uniformly continuous, and what's the idea behind this?  So what uniform continuity says is that if I take any two points in the interval that are close to each other, then the outputs have to be close to each other.  what two points you choose, as long as they're close together, the outputs will be close together in a controlled way. Now, if I take two points very close to each other here, very close to 0, they can be pretty close to each other, but their
differences, I mean, their values can be quite large.  even though the difference between the arguments are small, the value is going to be quite large just
because 1 over x shoots up. So let's quantify this. I have to tell you what the bad epsilon 0 is, choose epsilon 0 equals 2. Now, any epsilon 0,  let delta be positive, so now we have to find x and c in S within
distance delta to each other, that whose values differ by at least 2.  c to be the minimum of delta and 1, and I'm going to choose x to be c over 2. So just ignoring this half for a minute, c is equal to delta, x is equal to delta over 2, and then 1 over c minus 1 over x is going to be 2 over delta, and if delta is very small, that's
certainly bigger than or equal to 2.  I had to throw in this 1 1 1 1 1 half here because I chose
absolute not to be 2, and delta is arbitrary. So then we see that x minus c is equal c over 2, which is certainly less than or equal to, since c is the minimum of delta, and 1 over 1 1 1 1, is less than delta over 2, which is less than delta,  compute 1 over x minus 1 over c, this is, remember, x is c over 2, so this 1 over x is 2 over c, so 1 over c, and now from c being less than or
or equal to 1 over 1 over 1  I get that 1 over c is going to be bigger
than or equal to 2. And that's the end of the proof. So we see that even though these two arguments are very close  each other, the outputs are in fact, in fact, separated by some fixed distance at
least 2, but we could actually make it bigger than 3 bigger than 4, whatever you like.  But in fact, I'll leave it to you, or maybe I'll put it on the
assignment, f of x equals x squared is not uniformly continuous on R. So we saw that it's uniformly continuous on a closed interval 0, 1, but it's not uniformly continuous on all of R.  and being again, because x squared is starting to get big, so I can take two things close to each other, stick it into x squared, and their outputs
could be very different from each other. I didn't write out the proof of this one, so we're going to go a little bit by a little bit by the c of our pants.  So we want to show this is not uniformly continuous. So I think epsilon 0 equals 1 is going to work just fine.  let's call it a plus, well, c will be in some number and c equals some number x equals c plus delta over 2. So this is kind of scratch work off to the side.  minus c will be c over 2, will be delta over 2, which is less than delta. And now, let's see if we can choose c so that x squared minus c squared is bigger than or equal to 1.  is kind of the thing that we get to play with here. I mean, this is how it actually goes if you're want to figure out the proof before you
write it down, the scratch work to the side. Choose c so that this, now let's start off with the thing that we're trying to bound from below and start computing some stuff, this is equal to x plus c, and c will be positive.  be positive, so x plus c times x minus c, now x plus c will be 2c plus delta over 2, x minus c will be delta over 2. So so far, all of these things  and we get this is equal to 2c plus delta, 2c plus delta squared over 2, and here we're going to choose c positive.  their outputs are bigger than or equal to 1. So so far, if c is just something positive, x is c plus delta
over 2, then they're close, their difference, however, is going to be just by this computation equal to 2c plus delta over 2 times delta over 2 squared. Now, delta squared over 2 is always non-negative, so it's certainly bigger than or equal to delta times c.  to be bigger than or equal to 1, right now we have it's bigger than or equal
to delta c, so let's choose c to be 1 over delta.  then these two values are close, x minus c equals delta over 2 is less than delta, and x squared minus c squared equals x plus c times x minus c, x plus c, as we did a minute ago, is going to be 2 over delta plus delta over 2  2, that's x plus c, x minus c is equal to delta
over 2, which equals 1 plus delta squared over 4, which is bigger than or equal to 1, are bad epsilon. So f of x equals x squared is not uniformly continuous on R, even though it is uniformly continuous on this closed and bounded interval.  uniform continuity is really a relationship between a function and the domain on which it's defined.  continuity, as I've said, I mean, you can easily move from the definition that if a function is
uniformly continuous on S, then it's continuous on S. Now, and we've seen that in general, the reverse inclusion does not hold.  f uniformly continuous implies that f is continuous, this just follows from the definition.  as we're just saying, right, we have two examples here, f of x equals 1 over x on the open interval 0, 0, 1, which is continuous, but it's not uniformly continuous, and then we have the function f of x equals x squared, which is not uniformly
continuous on R, but in fact, it is,  uniformly continuous on this closed and bounded
interval 0, 1, this example here, though, is, in fact, the rule that if I'm looking at a continuous function or a function on closed and bounded interval, then, in fact, these two notions are equivalent.  So closed and bounded interval now, just an arbitrary set, then f is continuous on a, b, meaning it's continuous at every point, if and only if f is uniformly continuous on a, b.  on a closed and bounded interval is seen again by these examples, by this example we had here, of f of x equals 1 over x and f of x
equals x squared on R and 0, 1. But as long as we're looking on a closed and bounded interval, continuous is equivalent to uniform continuity.  which you can say is that if I replace this with what's called a compact set, which I may put in the assignment, I may not, then the
statement is still true, in some sense, the sharpest statement, but I think this is interesting enough to just work on a closed and bounded interval.  So again, this direction, I should say, I leave this to you as an exercise, uniform
continuity, and I'll leave it to you, and I will do more difficult one, and we'll use  philosophy like we did in the previous lecture, where we used the definition of continuity or this
theorem about continuity in terms of sequences and also the Bolzano-Weierstrass theorem.  some f continuous implies uniformly continuous, and we're going to do this by
contradiction, so suppose f is continuous on a, b, but not uniformly continuous.  And then we're going to break the universe in some way, which shows that our assumption that f is not
uniformly continuous does not hold.  0, so let me write this out. I'm just going to rewrite this here, then there
exists a delta 0 such that for all delta positive, there exists x c in a, b, which depend on delta, such that x minus c is less than delta,  f of x minus f of c is greater than or equal to epsilon 0. Now, this holds for every delta, you can find the x and c so that x minus c is less than delta, so f of x minus n, f of x minus f of c is greater than or equal to epsilon 0.  for all natural numbers n, and for all natural numbers n, there
exists xn, cn, a, b, such that, so this is a statement now with delta equals 1 over n, xn minus cn is less than 1 over n, and f of x sub n  minus f of c sub n is bigger than or equal to epsilon 0. Now, I have two sequences here, and they're bounded, because they're in this closed and bounded interval, so I can pass to a subsequence of
one of them to start by the Bolzano-Weierstein  not BZ, the limousonor of y or
strass, I think that's probably somewhere else in the lecture or the previous I wrote BZ, but I meant BW, by Bolzano of y or  x and a, b such that limit as k goes to infinity of x of n sub k equals x. So by Bolzano-Weierstrass from any bounded sequence, we can find a convergent
subsequence. And because this subsequence is always between a and b, the limit x will be between a and b.  look at, since the subsequence cn sub k is bounded between a and b. So I have a subsequence of x sub n's, and I then
obtained a subsequence of the c sub n's, by just  picking these integers to be the same. And so now, that subsequence is of the c sub n, they're all coming from a, b, so that's bounded by a, b, so it's bounded.  c sub n sub k sub j, j of c sub n sub k, and an element c in a, b, such that the limit as j goes to infinity of c sub n sub k sub j
equal c,  So I found a subsequence of the x sub n's, and now I look at a corresponding
subsequence of the c sub n's where now this subsequence, the n sub k's, are coming from the n sub k's chosen for this subsequence, that's still a bounded sequence, so by Bolzano-Weierstrass, I can take a subsequence of that, and an element c, so that I have convergence.  So now, let me just summarize.  the sequences x sub n sub k sub j. So now this is even a subsequence of x sub n sub k, and c sub n sub k sub j,  subsequences of the original sequences x of n, c sub n, and x sub n, and there exists x and c and a, b, such  j goes to infinity of x sub n sub j equals x and limit as j goes to infinity
of c sub n sub k, j, j, j equals c. Now, I claim x equals c.  Now, 0 is certainly bigger than or equal to x of n sub k sub j minus c sub n sub k sub j, which is less than or equal to by how we define these sequences, is less than or equal to 1 over n
sub k sub j.  And as j goes to infinity, so first off, by the definition of
subsequences, j is always bigger than or equal to n sub k. So this is always less than or equal to 1 over j. This is just a consequence of how subsequences are defined.  an entry in the sequence that you're going to take as an element of your
subsequence. So 0 is bounded, bounds this from below and is bounded above by 1 over j, which converges to 0. So the middle thing has to converge to 0 by the squeeze theorem.  But these two things, that converges to x, this converges to c. And so the absolute value of x minus c equals 0, and therefore, x equals c.  they're almost home free, the limit as j goes to infinity of x sub n sub k sub j equals c, and limit as j goes to infinity, c sub n sub
n sub k sub j equals c.  Now, where's the kicker?  is converging to a number c. So by the theorem about continuity, since f is continuous at c, this
implies at 0 equals the limit as j goes to infinity of f of x sub n sub n sub, so this way, f of c, minus f  f of c equals limit j equals the infinity of f of n sub f of c sub n sub k sub j, which is bigger than or equal to epsilon 0.  showing that's equal to 0, and that's the contradiction. plus f is uniformly continuous on a, b.  And as you'll note, going forward, we're going to cover
toppic's faster, that's just because we have more machinery to work with. At the start, it was very slow going just because one, it's the start of your first proof-based class, so I'm going to go slow.  we know more, and it'll be easier to prove new things, and hopefully,
familiarity with proof is getting better so that my arguments can be a little bit shorter and not so involved.  continuity, the next big topic has to be differentiability. So this is a new chapter about the derivative.  first off, I'll be saying let I be an interval, f goes from I to R, and c an element of I. Now, when I say an interval, I don't mean it has to be closed and bounded, like,
once we've been working on,  don't mean it has to be open, it doesn't have to be a bounded interval, like from 0 to 1, it could be 0 to infinity, it can
include the endpoints except, of course, infinity, but I think what I mean, and I don't have to write all this out for what exactly an interval is. So let I be an interval and f be a function from I to R and c a point of I.  that I think this should be pretty clear, for an interval, every point in the interval is a cluster point of the interval.  that there be a cluster point of a set containing of a set that this
limit is defined using, so of I take away c. And if you don't like this statement, just forget I even wrote it, and we'll continue on.  say f is differentiable at c, so this is the new bit of terminology, if the limit x goes to c, f of x minus f of c
over x minus c  exist. If this limit exists, we say the function is
differentiable at c, and we write, we use a notation, f prime, f positive, c, for this limit.  f is differentiable at every point of the interval I, we get a new function, this function f prime of c, which  We denote the function that's a derivative of f as f prime or df df dx.  calculus, and I'm not going to go through what this is supposed to represent. You know this from calculus, the best way to say what this number
represents is the instantaneous rate of change of the function f at this point, how is f changing at that point, in the sense of increasing decreasing, decreasing, and so on?  of the line that is perfectly tangent to the
curve to the graph of the function f, but what does that mean to be tangent to the graph of a function so that it takes a bit of explaining?  So the simplest example of a function which is
differentiable is that of a monomial, so f of x equals x to the n, let's put even a number in there.  a natural number, 0, then function f of x equals alpha times x to the n is
differentiable. So I should have said here as well, if a function is differentiable at every point where it's defined, or if a function  for all c, f prime of c equals n times alpha x, the n minus 1, c.  So let's give a proof of that. And we'll use this simple formula. So let's take a look at x minus c times this weird looking sum  x n minus 1 minus j, c to the j, so this is equal to, multiply the x
through, I get sum from a equals 0, 2n minus 1, x to the n minus j, c to the j minus, and I'm not going to use j, again, in the sum when I  sum from l equals 0 to n minus 1, x to the n minus, I'll
put it this way, j plus 1, c to the j plus 1, L, and now I'm going to make a change of variables in the second sum, and let j equals L plus 1,  OK, so in that case, when l equals 0, j starts at 1, when l hits n minus 1, j equals n, so this equals the sum from j equals 0, n minus 1, xn minus j, c to the j, minus sum, j equals 1 to n, xn minus j, c to the j,  So it's the same terms in the sum, except starting at different places, so what doesn't get
killed here is the j equals 0 term, because this one starts at j equals 1, this one n's at n, and so it kills the n minus 1 term. So the only thing that survives from this sum is the j equals 0 term, x to the n minus 0, c to the 0 minus  everything gets killed except the n term, so x to the n minus n c to the n equals x to the n minus c to the n,
so this is therefore equal to this. So we use this to compute this limit, so then f prime of c is equal to the limit as x goes to c of x  to the n alpha times x to the n times alpha times c to the n over x minus c, now alpha is just a number,
it can pop out, x to the n minus c to the n divided by x minus c is this thing divided by x minus c, so this is equal to alpha times the limit as x goes to c of sum from j equals 0 to n minus 1, x to the n minus  is 1 minus j c to the j. Now, this is just a polynomial in x. Polygonomials are a continuous function, so the limit as x goes to c is just you plug in c to x. So this equals alpha times sum from j equals 0 to n minus 1, c to the n minus 1 minus j times j equals c to the n minus 1 minus 1 minus j times
1 minus j times c to the j  let me c to the n minus 1, I'm summing in j, there's no j here, so that just pops out, times the sum j equals 0, n minus 1, and there's n of the times 1, so this is just n, and that's the proof.  next time, we'll continue with, we'll give an example of a function which is not
differentiable at a point, of course, I think you probably already know this, f of x equals the absolute value of x. If there's time at some point, I'll go over an example of a function which was very surprising to people at one point, so now that we have different  believe that if you have a continuous function, any continuous function, then there has to be at least one point
where it's differentiable.  continuous, but are differentiable nowhere, they're not
differentiable at a single point, and perhaps depending on time, we'll go over this example, and I'll stop there.