 OK, so let's finish the proof that we started at the end of the lecture last time.  therefore, we'll come to you at the same time, I didn't feel so bad about it.  rational number that is given by the supremum, then it's bigger than or equal to 1, and x squared has to be bigger than or equal to 2. And so now we would like to show that, in fact, x squared equals 2. Now, since x squared is bigger than or equal to 2, it's either equal to 2 or bigger than 2, and we want to show that the
second possibility is not possible.  contradiction. So let's assume that the thing that we say cannot happen does happen, and we're going to
derive a false statement. So find h, this is going to be x squared minus 2 over 2x.  a couple of things that, since x squared is bigger than 2, this
implies, h is bigger than 0, which implies x minus h is less than x. So what is the contradiction going to be? It's going to be that this element x minus h is, in fact, an upper bound for the set E, and this will contradict  that x is the supremum, in other words, it's the least upper bound for the set E. There's no upper bound for E that can be less than x.  is an upper bound for this set E. Now, let's take a look at x minus h squared.  is equal to x squared minus 2x, plus h squared, now just given by, if we just plug in what h is, this is equal to x squared minus x squared minus 2, so that's putting h in, and then the 2x here,
cancels with the 2x there, so I just get x squared minus 2 plus h  squared, which equals 2 plus h squared, remember, h is a positive number, so 2 plus a positive
number, this is bigger than 2. So x minus h squared is bigger than 2. So now I'm going to use this to show that x minus h is an upper bound for e, so let  Q squared is less than 2, then I have Q squared is less than 2, which is less than x minus h squared by what we just proved here.  that what we proved here was x minus h squared is bigger than 2. So we have Q squared is less than 2 is less than
x minus h squared, so that means 0 is bigger than x minus h squared minus Q squared. Q squared is less than this, so then if I just subtracted, I get this inequality. So that implies that 0 is bigger than, now this is the difference of 2 squared, so I can write  says x minus h plus Q minus Q, now, if I just write out what x minus h is using the definition of h, this is equal to x
squared plus 2 over 2x  plus Q over x minus h minus Q. Now, the product of these two numbers is positive, this number is positive because
Q is positive, and so that means there's some is positive, so I have something  positive times this, so I can divide by this positive thing and
keep the inequality, so that implies that 0 is less than x minus h minus Q, which implies that Q is less than x minus h. So we started off with an element of E, an arbitrary element of E, and we proved that Q is less than x minus h.  thus, for all Q in E, Q is less than x minus h, which implies that x minus
h is an upper bound for E.  let me keep that board for now, I'll write the last
since or so of this proof.  which implies since x is the supremum of e, it should be less than or equal
to all upper bounds, which implies h is less than or equal to 0, but this is a direct contradiction  being a positive number. So this is the false statement we
ultimately prove. But the idea is that if x squared is bigger than 2, you can find a lower bound, an upper bound, which is strictly smaller than x, which contradicts the fact that x is the greatest lower bound for e.  So it was our original original assumption to begin with, in this line of
reasoning, that was that x squared is bigger than 2, and that concludes the proof.  So this was a statement about just if I have some element that's a rational number and it's equal to the supremum
than it square has to be 2. Now, I'm going to prove that basically no such element exists, and therefore, that the rational numbers do not have the least upper bound property, which was the discussion above  those two lines in that circle on that board up there. So what's the theorem we're going to prove the set E as before, so this is a rational number, such that
cue is bigger than 0, Q squared is less than 2,  is bounded above and as no supremum in Q.  kind of ordered set, which is my universe Q, I'm not saying that it doesn't have a supremum in E, I'm saying it doesn't
have a supremum in a universe where it sits. And therefore, the rational numbers do not have the least upper bound property, because this set is set, which is bounded above and has no supremum in Q.  OK, so the first thing I want to show is that this set
e is bounded above, let Q be in E, then Q squared is less than 2, which is less than 4, so this tells me 4 minus Q squared is positive, which  minus Q times 2 plus Q is positive. Now, since 2 is positive and Q is positive, 2 plus Q is positive, so I can divide both sides of this
inequality by this, 2 plus Q without changing the inequality, which implies I'm just going to flip this inequality,  thus for all Q and E, Q is less than 2. So 2 is an upper bound for the set E.  So that proves that the set E is bounded above. So now I'm going to prove that no supremum exists by using the
previous theorem, which says if I have a supremum, then it square must be 2.  So now we show that the sup of E does not exist, and we do this by contradiction. Now, I know it seems like a lot of the proofs we're doing are by contradiction, this should not give you the
impressure that all proofs should be done by contradiction  contradiction. Many proofs that you will do in homework can be done directly, meaning not by contradiction. For example, this first little proof that E is bounded above, this is a direct proof, meaning I proved directly that it's bounded above, I do not assume that it's not
bounded above and arrive at a contradiction.  it is proof by contradiction is very tempting because it at least gets you going somewhere. If you can assume not, then you get to a next step, which this assumption implies something else, and hopefully you can keep going until you arrive at something false.  So by contradiction, so we will assume that such a supremum
does exist.  and call it x. So x is the supremum of this set. So by the previous theorem, since x is an element of the
rational numbers, which is the supremum of this set, then x is bigger than or equal to 1, and it squares 2  2, by the previous theorem, x is bigger than or equal to 1, and x squared equals 2. In fact, x has to be bigger than 1. I cannot equal 1 because the square
would give me 1, not 2.  So I can make that statement that x is, in fact, bigger than 1, not just
bigger than or equal to, OK? So since x is a rational, there exist M in natural numbers such that  m is bigger than n, and x is equal to M over n. So that's what it means for x to be a rational number, and for it to be bigger than 1.  there exists an n such that n times x is a natural number, just multiplying
through by n, that means that n times x is equal to m, which is a natural number. So let S be the set of natural numbers so that when I multiply x by k  I get a natural number. And so what we've shown just based on our assumption is that S is not empty, because n is in S. Now, this is a subset of natural number, so by the well-ordering
property of n,  this set S has a least element, which we'll call k0 and S.  So what I'm going to show is that, in fact, this little guy k0 is not, in fact, the least
element of this set S, which would contradict exactly how it's defined.  minus k0, and note this is an integer, why? Because k0 times x, so k0 is in the set S, meaning k0 times x is a natural number, so it's an integer. k0 is a natural number, so the difference of two integers is, again, an integer. So k0 is a natural number, k0 times x is a natural number, so the difference of two natural
numbers  gives me an integer. But in fact, it's a natural number.  So let's go over here. So so far, we have that k1 is a natural number, and I'm going to prove that k1 is actually less than k0,  So since x squared equals 2, I should say, so let's write it this way.  4 minus x squared is positive, I mean, I just wrote down 2, 4 minus x squared is just 2, so this tells me taking the
difference, 2 minus x times 2 plus x is positive, 2 and x are positive, so I can divide this inequality through by this term and maintain the inequality, which implies 2 minus x is positive,  x is less than 2, so x is less than 2, then k1, which remember is k0 times x minus 1 is less than k0, so k0 is a natural
number, it's positive, x minus 1 is bounded by 2 minus 1 equals k0.  So what we've shown is so far is that this number k1 is a natural number and it's less than k0.  let's remember what k0 is supposed to be. k0 is supposed to be the smallest element of this set S. It's the smallest natural number, so that when I multiply it by x, I get another
natural number, and from this k0, I constructed a new natural number called k1, which is less than k0, and it's a natural number.  If we compute what x times k1 is, this is by definition x times x times k0 minus k0, this is equal to x squared, k0 minus x times k0, which equals 2, k0 minus
c0,  x times k0 because x squared equals 2, and this last part, this is equal to k0 plus k0 minus xk0, which equals k1.  Now, that's a natural number, that's a natural number, this natural number is bigger than
this natural number, therefore their difference is, again, a natural number. So this says that x times k1 is a natural number, thus k1 is in S,  and k1 is less than k0, which implies k0 is not the least element in S, which is a contradiction to the fact  fact that it is the least element of S. So what we've shown is assuming that this set E has a supremum in the rational numbers, then we arrive at a contradiction.  So our original assumption
assumption must be false thus sup E does not exist.  of the fact that the square root of 2 is not a rational number, there's a different proof that maybe is a little bit simpler, but this one
use is ordering instead to prove it, which I thought was pretty cool, and it's originally due to dedication.  that was in that theorem that I stated earlier, which I'll restate in a minute, namely that it is a set that has the least
upper bound property. So I stated that as a theorem, I'm not going to prove that theorem, we just want to understand exactly what sets the real numbers of part.  is the least upper bound property. So we've now discuss what the least upper
bound property means, so we just need to fill in one other part about the real numbers, which is the fact that it's an ordered field.  R is, in fact, the unique ordered field with the least
upper bound property, remember, we've just proven that Q does not have the least upper bound property. So in some sense, Q is missing stuff. It's missing stuff, it's missing square roots of 2, which is an algebraic thing, namely, I can't solve the equation, x squared minus 2 equals 0 in the rational numbers, and the fact that you have this algebraic  that manifests itself in this fact that Q is also missing things with respect to an order. So Q in short, this is me saying that Q has holes, and R does not.  about R, and perhaps you heard in high-school calculus, and you're
here and repeated now, but in a nutshell, I mean, Q as holds in R does not, but this means something very specifically that R has the least upper bound property and Q does not.  So a set f is a field if it has two operations,  plus, and I'm going to put a dot here in the
middle times, basically, such that you have a list of properties that hold with respect to these operations. The first is with respect to, so this is plus, this is times, this is addition multiplication. So the first condition is that this set is closed with respect to taking  sums, so if xy is in f, then x plus y is in f, this operation of addition should be commutative, I hope that's how you spell it.  x, y in f, x plus y equals y plus x,
assosyativity, so this is a condition that for all x, y, z, and f, if I add x and y, and then add z, this is equal to adding x  the sum of y and z. The fourth is that we have, what's called an
identity element, an additive identity element, there exists an element which I'll label 0 in this set f such that for all x and f  0 plus x equals 0, and we also have additive n versus, namely for all x and f, there exists an element which I  plus plus minus x equals 0. So these are the conditions on the condition that should be
satisfied for a field. So that's about addition. So the conditions for multiplication are similar, namely, and needs to be closed with respect to multiplication, so if x y  and x times y is in f, multiplication should also be
commonitive, so I'm just going to abbreviate that commutative as c, for all x, y in f, x times y equals y times x,  have a sociativity, let's not shorten it by that, for all x, y, z and f, I multiply x times y and then multiply it by z, it's the same as taking x and multiplying it by y times z.  the existence of a multiplicative identity, there exists an element which I label as 1 in this set f, such that for all x and f, 1 times x equals x.  x in f take away 0, so for everything in the field that's non-zero, there exists an element which I call x to the minus 1, and
f such that x times x to the minus 1 equals 1. Now, these are statements about the two operations, there's one last assumption in the definition that connects to 2,  the distributive law, namely that for all x, y, z, and f, if I take x plus y times
z, this is x times z plus y times c. So all these conditions, so a field  So it is a set with two operations plus and dot, meaning multiplication, and these two operations need to satisfy all of these
conditions for my set to be called a field. So the clearest example is, of course, rational numbers with the usual plus and minus, plus and multiplication, define as you learned  as a child. Now, what's a non-example? The integers, so the integers come with plus and multiplication, however, it doesn't satisfy the
existence of n-verses, of multiplicative inverses, M5, but it does satisfy everything  And typically, one would call z, what's called a commutative, commutative, commutative, to a ring, commutative because multiplication is also a commutative, but a ring in general does not necessarily have to satisfy the multiplication being
been commutative, for example, the set of, say, 2 by 2  to matrices, former ring, what's an example of another example of a field, what we have, maybe I should have given this one first, z2, which is the simplest field there is, is just the element of 2, it's just a set of two elements, 0 and 1, where I need to define what 1 plus 1 is,  1 plus 1 define the b0, so 1 plus 1 is 0, and 1 plus 1 is 0, and that's it. 0 times 0 would be 0, 0 times 1 would be 0, 0 plus 0 would be 0, and that gives you all of the rules you need to know to be able to define
to be able to define multiplication and addition on this set  of these two elements, this is a field because what is the inverse of 1, well, it's just 1. And you can check that if I define a
difficulted by this rule along with the other rules that, along with  that these defining plus and multiplication this way satisfies all the
conditions of being a field. More non-trivial example would be, let's say, z3, this is a set 0, 1, 2. Only now, the arithmetic, so this, I didn't use such a fancy word  here, but the arithmetic is done, mod 3 here, here, here it was mod 2, meaning if I want to add two
elements, I add them, and then I take the remainder of that sum after dividing by 3. So here, an addition is defined mod 3.  of 3, then I equate it to 0. So for example, 1 plus 2, which gives me 3, it's a
multiple of 3, this is defined to be 0. 2 times 2, which equals 4, which equals 3 plus 1, multiples of 3 or 0, so that gives me 1. And in particular, this tells me that in this field, 2 times 2 equals 1. So the multiplicative inverse of 2 is given by it  itself, 2, and a times b equals, let's say, d, mod 3. So it's another example of a field.  p is a prime, you get another field, you get a finite field, so these are examples of what are called
finite fields because they are fields and they have finite number of elements.  algebraic statements that you've ever known, simply from these
acseums of fields. So for example, let me just give you the silly example of a statement you can prove just using these elements, these axiums, you can prove the statement that for all x and f, so f is a field here,  if throughout will be if x is a field, then for all x in f, 0 times x is 0.  OK, make sure there's no other errors, I don't think there are. This is another danger about not being able to lecture in person is that
aers on the board persists. OK, so you can prove this blockbuster theorem just using these axioms,  So let's do a quick proof of this, if x is in f, then 0 is equal to 0 times x plus the additive
inverse of 0 times x, because that's just the definition of the additive inverse, every element has an additive inverse, and now 0 is equal to 0 plus 0,  again, the additive inverse of x, and now I use the
discributive law, this is 0 times x plus 0 times x plus the additive inverse of 0 times x, and that cancels with that, and I get 0 times x. So I started off with 0, and I arrive that it's equal to 0 times x.  you can prove other simple algebraic statements using these axioms as well, I think it'll put in the
assignment, and I'll just state you can also prove things like if I want to look at minus x, then this  is equal to the additive inverse of 1 times x. I mean, this is not, it's not terribly
interesting at the start, there are essentially some very deep theorems in algebra that you learn at another point in your life, but that won't be in this class.  algebraic things are, to me, nice, because somehow you always deal with
equality, so how hard could it be to prove two things are equal to each other? Yet, analysis deals a lot with inequality, which somehow is much more subtle, but that's just a little bias.  field is, a field is just, again, the set that has these two operations, what is an ordered field?  which is also an ordered set, but you can't have two different structures on your field and not
interact for that to be interesting.  are co-habitating nicely, meaning you have two conditions for all x, y, z, and f, if x is less than y, then x plus z is less than y plus z.  bigger than 0 and y is bigger than 0, then x times y is bigger than 0. And I just use that terminology anyways right now, but for an ordered field f, if an element is bigger than 0, then  or if it's bigger than or equal to 0, we say x is positive and
respectively non-negative. So non-negative if x is bigger than or equal to 0, positive x is bigger than 0, and then, likewise, with negative and non-positive.  basic example, again, is Q, Q is an ordered field, with the usual
order and with the usual algebraic structure on Q. What is not an example is either one of the two fields, I wrote down just a minute ago,  So, an non-example is this field here, 0, 1,  So if I put an order on this, either 0 is less than 1 or 1 is less than 0. So remember, it does not have to necessarily correspond to the fact that that 0, you connect to 0 in the integers, and that 1, you connect to 1 in the integers.  is less than that element. So let's consider either cases, and suppose we have that
order on this set and show that it does not turn this set into an ordered field.  then either 0 is less than 1, or 1 is less than 0. So let's do the first case, 0 is less than 1, if 0 is less than 1, then what happens if I add  to 1 to each side. So 1 plus 0 would give me 1, 1 plus 1 would be 0, and therefore, is not, so less than 1 plus 1.  So if I have an order on 0, 2, 2 possibilities, either 0 is less than 1 or 1 is less than 0, if 0 is less than 1, then by the definition of
addition on this set, if I add 1 to 0, I get 1, if I add 1 to 1, I get 0, and therefore,  If I were to add 1 to both sides, I would not get a true
inequality, because I'm assuming 0 is less than 1. So this condition number 1 does not hold for this order. And neither does it hold for choosing 1 is less than 0 by the same logic,  So 1 plus 1 is not less than, so this set is not this field cannot be turned into an ordered field. And essentially, the same thing that I've done here shows that you cannot have any finite ordered field.  So in general, there are no finite ordered fields.  the blockbuster statement at 0 times anything in the
field equals 0, we can also prove all of the manipulations of inequalities that you use without fear simply from, again,  cms about an ordered field being a field, and also satisfying these two
equalities, these two conditions here for it to be an ordered field.  if f is an ordered field, then if x is an element of f and x is positive, this implies its additive
inverse is negative, n vice versa, if x is less than 0, then minus x  positive. So I know it's tempting to think, well, yeah, just multiply this inequality by minus 1 to
give this inequality, but remember, this is really a statement about the additive inverse of x.  is not hard, if x is positive, then I could write it this way, 0 is less than x, then by property number 1, I can add anything to both sides and get the same inequality and
preserved the inequality, and therefore, minus x plus 0 is less than  the additive inverse of x plus x, plus x. Now, by the fact that 0 is the additive
identity, a 4, the left side is going to be minus x, and by the definition of the additive inverse of x, the right-hand side is going to be 0.  a 4 and a 5, and this previous statement is by 1 in this definition before. And I'm not going to prove this statement as well, it's essentially the same proof. I add minus x to both sides and use which I can do by 1, and then I use a 4 and a 5 to
conclude that x is,  that minus x is positive.  proposition 1 point, 1 point 8 in textbook for the other, let's say, for the other proofs  standard inequality, and
equality manipulations. So Q is an ordered field, and as I stated before about R, R is also an ordered field,  a separate bound property, so maybe you are asking yourself, how about some
greatest lower bound property, the least upper bound property is about sups, can we make a similar property about infs, are there sets that have the least upper bound property that don't have say a greatest lower bound property,  something has the greatest lower bound property if every non-empty set which is bounded
bellow has an infimum, that's what I'm referring to, even though I haven't written it down.  satisfies a least upper bound property, then it also satisfies a
greatest lower bound property, which I'll state as a theorem, and then we'll prove let f be an ordered field  with the least upper bound property. Now, I'm going to prove that it has, if you like, a
greatest lower bound property, then if a is a subset of f, which is non-empty,  down it below, then inf a, exists, n f, meaning a has an infima in the set f.  And in some sense, we did something similar when we proved that one set, given by all the minus 1 minus 2 minus 3, had the
greatest upper bound property, or the least upper bound property by taking its minus and then using, in a sense, the greatest lower bound property of the natural numbers, this well-ordering principle, to conclude that that that set had the least  for bound property, and that's what we're going to do here is we're going to take a set which is
bounded below, take its minus, if you like, which is now bounded above, take the sup of that set which we can do and show that that's the infimum of that set.  And I'll draw it like f is the real number line, which it is, because part of the statement about the real numbers is that it's the unique
ordered field with the least upper bound property, but don't worry about that for now.  for now, I'll draw it like it's an interval, which is bounded below, so it stops after some point, and there's nothing there.  I now have a set which is bounded above, so if this is a
a lower bound for a, then minus b will be an upper bound for minus a, and therefore, minus a has a least upper bound, which in this picture I'm drawing looks like x.  x to b, here's a, and here's now minus x to show that minus x is an infimum of a. So that's the basic intuition on why this holds. We're using the ordered field property to be able to take minuses, that's where the field property is coming in, and that minuses, although we didn't
prove this, it is one of those  Essentially, we did prove this that if I have something positive, and I multiply it
through by minus 1, using this as well, then that reverses the inequality. But again, these are short, unless I'm telling you to prove a certain inequality, a simple inequality statement of this type,  feel just freely use the inequality facts that you remember from high school, and just know that these
precise for ordered fields in general.  Suppose a, so I am not stating it here, but f is an ordered
field with the least upper bound property, I'll go ahead and state it.  the subset of f, a not equal to empty set, a bounded below, then that means there exists an element b in f such  b is less than or equal to a, such that for all a in capital A, b is less than or equal to a.  because we're in Massachusetts, if you're a different
country, you turn into the language that's spoken there, you just need to turn it into written word. So there exists a lower bound for a, let me note another set called minus, which I'll label minus a, this is the set of all elements in f of the form minus  the additive inverses of a as a is in capital A. So it's the additive
inverse of all elements in capital A, then the fact that I have for all a and a, b is less than or equal to a implies  minus a is less than or equal to minus b because multiplying
through by minus 1 flips the inequality, that implies so minus b is bigger than or equal to every element of minus a, so that implies b is an upper bound for the set minus a  So minus a is a non-empty subset of f, which is bounded above,
therefore it has a supremum. Thus, there exists x and f such that x equals sup of this set minus a.  assuming the least upper bound property, that every non-empty set which is
bounded above has a supremum, I'm going to show this guy x is, in fact, the infimum of this set a, or minus x is the infimum of a.  implies that for all a in capital A, minus a is less than or equal to x, because x is supposed to be the least
upper bound, so it's in fact an upper bound, so that means that for all a and a, again, just flipping the inequalities, minus x is less than or equal to a, which implies minus x is a lower bound for capital  We now have to show that minus x is the greatest
lower bound of a. If I take any other lower bound of a, then minus x is bigger than or equal to that lower bound.  if y is lower bound for a, then y is less than or equal to minus x. And then that concludes the proof showing that minus x is, in fact, the infimum of a, and therefore, a has an infimum. We've actually identified what the infimum is, is the sup of
minus a.  So let y be a lower bound for a, then exactly how I showed this for this single
lower bound that I had for a, you can verify this again, just go through the argument and replace b with y, then minus y is an upper bound,  just look at the picture, replace b with y for minus a, which implies since x is a supremum of a, so since x is a supremum of minus a, it's the least upper bound, so it has to be less than or
or equal to minus y,  And flipping the inequality again on that means that y is less than or equal to
minus x, which is what we wanted to prove, thus the inf of a exists, and we've, in fact, showed that it's equal  the sup of minus a. So in an ordered field, with the least upper
bound property, not only does every set which is bounded above have a supremum, every set which is bounded below has an infimum.  R, the set of real numbers, and I'm just going to, again, state this theorem about the
existence of R and its properties, so just to bring this all back to our goal of describing exactly what R is, or what separates it from Q  So there exists a unique ordered field with the least upper bound property containing Q.  S field, we denote by R. So Q just to bring this back. So we started off in ancient times with the natural numbers, we move to the integers so that we can take additive
inverse  so they didn't call them that, but we wanted 0, and then we move to the rational numbers because we didn't have
waves to solve the equation 2x plus 1 equals 0, and so we moved on from Q to R, essentially because we can't solve the equation x squared minus 2 equals 0,  of x squared minus 2 equals 0, although an algebraic fact, in fact, in fact, means that
cue is incomplete as an ordered set, does not have this least upper bound property. And what characterizes the real numbers is that it is an ordered field containing Q, and it's the unique one  with the least upper bound property. This unique should be in quotes because unique up to what's called isomorphism. Isomorphism is a fancy way of saying what you call apples, I call monotoneous.  essentially. OK, so this is what R is. It's the unique ordered field with the least
upper bound property containing Q, and so I'm not going to prove this theorem, the way you usually prove this theorem, you construct R, either as what are called debticant cuts, or as equivalence classes of Cauchy sequences, we'll  So, I'm going to go on to
function on our limits, which is what analysis is, is a study of limits, rather than get tied up in really non-analytic facts,  this are the actual field. So we're just going to take this as a given, and now we're going to go from here and start
proving facts about real numbers, where Q failed R succeeds.  exists a unique element in R such that R is positive, and R squared equals 2. So we saw before that if I replace this with a Q, rational number, that's false. There does not exist a rational number, which square is 2. But in the real numbers, there does, and right now, maybe you're tempted to say, you said R equal to square root of 2, what is square root of 2?  2, how do you come up with that guy? So we have to come up with some element of R
who square is 2. Now, we basically did that a minute ago in the rational numbers, and the same proof works here.  is positive, and x squared is less than 2. So earlier in the lecture, and at the end of the last
less lecture, we had Q here, right? Well, the same proof, basically, and what we did earlier than E is bounded, is bounded above by 2,  So R, which I, so sup the tilde exists in R. So I have this set, it's bounded above by 2, I mean, we did the proof earlier, so by the least upper bound property of R, the
supremum exists, call this element little R.  then the same proof, I'm not going to do it again because we've already done it, and all you need to do is replace  shows R is bigger than or equal to 1, in fact, it's bigger than 1, and R squared equals 2. So there does exist an element of R, which is positive, and
who square is 2. Now, I will prove that it's unique. So now I want to prove that R is unique.  that means if I take, if there's some other element in capital R that satisfies
these two inequalities, then it must be equal to my original R. So suppose our tilde is in R, our tilde is bigger than 0, and R until the square  OK, then since their square is the same number, namely 2, 0 is equal to R tilde minus R squared, which equals R tilde plus R, R tilde minus R, now both R and R tilde are positive, so R plus R  delta is positive, and in particular, it's non-zero, so since it's a field, I can therefore divide or multiply both sides by the
additive inverse of this thing and arrive at 0 is equal to R tilde minus R or R equals R tilde. So there exists only one element in the real numbers, which is positive and whose square is 2.  and I'll put it on the assignment, namely that this shows what square root of 2 exists, but you can then show and
cube root of 2 exists in R.  and we'll not prove this, but you can show in general that if x is in R, then x to the 1 over n, I should say, x is positive, for all natural numbers.  So where Q-failed are succeeds, and it's doing this, or the fact that it does succeed, is not coming from an algebraic property of R, it's coming from this property about its order.  you