 OK, so let's continue our discussion of continuity, which we began last time, which is, which I defined last time, and I
wrote again here,  which intuitively says that if you want to be that if x is sufficiently close to number c, then f of x will be close to f of c. So it connects how the function behaves near a point to how a function behaves at the point.  which is continuous everywhere, namely the function f of x equals a, x plus b, and 1 that was not
continuous at a point c, and we ended with, let me just recall the question I asked last time, if f is a function, let's say that its hold domain is R, does there exist  point where it's continuous. Now, I could answer this question now just using the definition, but I'll
answer it in a minute after we prove following theorem, which is an analog of this theorem that we proved here for limit  right, we showed that if you have a subset S of R, a cluster point of S, so this is where you take limits, and then the limit as x goes to c of f of x equals L, if and only if, for every
sequence converging to c, we have f of xn, which is a new sequence converges to L. So this connects limits of functions to limits of sequences,  limits along sequences, if you like. And we're going to prove an analog of this theorem
now for the notion of continuity, but there's kind of, and these two definitions, certainly look, if you look at the definition of limit and the definition of continuity, this one certainly looks like the definition of limit where now the limit has to be f of c, the function evaluated at that point,  it essentially is, but we do have a kind of degenerate case where c here is not required to be a cluster point of
S, it's just any point of S, and we'll have two cases c is a cluster point of S, and c is not a cluster point of S, and you'll see that when c is not a cluster point of S, we'll have a silly situation for talking about continuity.  which has three parts, so suppose S is a subset of R, c is an element of S, f is a function from S to R, so the first part is if c is not a cluster point of S,  f is continuous at c. So if we're looking at continuity at a point, the only interesting point to look at
are cluster points of the set S, otherwise, no matter what function it is, it will be continuous at such a point.  of S, then which is essentially the only thing that's missing from this definition and the definition for limit, then f is continuous at c, and this is born out in this theorem, if and only if the limit as x goes to c of f of x equals f of c.  And the third part of this theorem, which is now the analog of this theorem we proved here for
limits is the following, f is continuous at c if and only if for every sequence  xn of elements of S such that x sub n converges to c, we have f of x sub n converges to f of c.  c is not a cluster point of the set, then every function is going to be
continuous at that point. So if c is not a cluster point of S, this is a silly case to look at.  the newity is a connection between f near a point and the
function at the point. Now, if the only points near c is c, then f of x equals f of c for x near c, because x can only be c. And therefore, that will be less than epsilon.  f2 itself at c. So let's suppose f is not a cluster point. So we want to prove continuity, so that's a for all epsilon delta
argument, so let epsilon be positive, since c is not a cluster point of S,  what does this mean? So remember, to be a cluster point of a set S
means for all delta positive there exists, so let me recall what it means to be a cluster point over here on the side.  the set x minus delta, x plus delta, x plus delta intersect, c intersect,
s takeaway c is non-empty. So since c is not a cluster point, that means there exists some delta 0 so that this interval is disjoint from S takeaway c, such  c minus delta 0, c plus delta 0, intersect S take away c equals the empty set. Now, if I include c in this intersection, so another way of stating this is that the only thing since c is an element of S, the only thing that's in this
intersection is c.  So this here is the rigorous way of saying there's nothing in S near c except for c itself, and therefore, there's nothing to compare to f of c.  if c minus f of c is 0, so choose delta to be delta 0, then if x minus, so now we want to say that this delta works, so if x is in S, and x minus c is less than delta, that
implies x equals c because the only thing  in this interval that's coming from S is c, and therefore, f of x minus f of c, this is equal to f of c minus f of c equals 0, which is less than epsilon. So this is a really degenerate case of when you're trying to
trying to see if a function's continuous at a certain point,  So let's now move to the more interesting part that c is a cluster point.  And we want to show f is continuous at c if and only if the limit of f of f as x goes to c of f of x equals f of c. Going this direction is really quite
easy, so we're going to go this direction and you should be able to prove this direction just from what I write down here.  is kind of silly because the definitions are just so close, except for the now c is a cluster point, so that's not
not missing from either definition, but the only difference is this guy, you only look at x near c, but not at c. So suppose the limit as x goes to c of f of x equals f of c, now we want to show that f of x is continuous at c,  epsilon be positive, since we have this, there exists a delta positive such that if x is in S and the absolute value of x minus
  to c is bigger than 0 is less than delta 0, then f of x minus f of c is less than epsilon. And we'll just choose delta to be this delta 0.  so let's write it this way. If x equals c, then clearly f of x minus f of c equals f of c
minus f of c equals 0 is less  and epsilon, and if x0 equals c, then that's certainly bigger than 0, but we're still assuming it's less than delta, which remember is this delta 0, coming from the fact that the limit as x goes to c of f of x,  this is less than epsilon. So it's just follows immediately from the definition, there's not much to it.  we have over there for limits. So let's prove this direction.  the right-hand side of this statement. So let x sub n be a sequence in S, so of elements of S, so that xn converges to c.  do this picture for limits, and it's the same picture
and now for this guy, and we're wanting to show now that limit as n goes to infinity of f of x sub n equals f of c.  here's f of c plus epsilon, f of c minus epsilon. So what do we know? We know the function is
continuous at c. So that means that if I take, if I look at c, then there exists a delta so that if I'm in this interval here, everything in this interval gets mapped  inside of this interval. Now, what else do I know or what else in my assuming? x sub n is a
sequence converging to S. So for large n, for n big enough, for some capital M0, x sub n is going to lie inside this interval, if you like, in the definition of convergence of a sequence, epsilon is equal to delta in that definition,  so don't mind that. So for all n, big enough, x sub n lies in this interval, and since this interval gets mapped inside this
interval by f, this f of x sub n will end up in this interval within epsilon to f of c, as long as n is big enough. So this picture I just went through, this is the proof, and now we just need to write it out.  since f is continuous at c, there exists a delta positive such that if x minus c is less than delta, this
tells me f of x minus f of c  is less than epsilon. Now, since the sequence x sub n converges to c, there exists some integer capital M0 such that for all n bigger than or equal to M0, x sub n minus c is less than delta. And therefore, for all n bigger than or equal to M0,  So f of xn will be within epsilon of f of c. So this will be the m we choose, then if n is bigger than or equal to m, we get that x sub n minus x minus c is less than delta, which implies by how delta is defined, delta, if x minus c is within distance  delta f of x minus f of c is within distance epsilon, we get f of x sub n minus f of c is less than epsilon.  So now we'll prove the opposite direction, so we're assuming that this statement star holds, namely for all sequence x sub n's converging to c, we have f of x sub n converging to f of c, and we want to prove that the limit or that f is
continuous at c.  And we're going to do this by contradiction, which is the same way we proved the opposite
direction for the theorem about limits. So the proof is by contradiction, namely suppose the conclusion we want does not hold, so suppose f is not continuous at c,  So let me recall, we negated that definition in the last
least lecture, but we'll negate it again, for this, this means that there exists a bad epsilon so that for all delta positive, there exists an x in S satisfying x minus c is less than delta, and f of x minus f of c is  than or equal to epsilon 0. So since we're assuming f is not continuous, there exists epsilon 0, so we have all this, which holds for every delta, and now we'll choose delta to be 1, 1 1, 1 1, 1 1, 1,
1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, and so on.  exists x sub 1 in S such that x sub 1 minus c is less than 1, and f of x sub 1 minus f of c is bigger than or equal to epsilon 0.  such that x sub 2 minus c is less than 1, and so here, this is delta equals 1, 1, so this is delta
equals 1, so this is delta equals 1, and so on.  the next statement I'm about to make, then for all natural numbers n, there exists an x sub n in S
such that x sub n minus c is less than 1 over n and f of x sub n minus f of c is bigger than or equal to epsilon 0.  Now, let's take a look at this sequence. We're trying to break something, and we'll end up breaking the star
assumption. Now, we have this sequence x sub n's of S, which are getting closer and closer to c. So we have 0 is bigger than or equal to x sub n, minus c is bigger, is less than 1 over n. So this converges to 0, this converges to 0.  x sub n minus c converges to 0, and therefore, x sub n converges to c. By squeeze theorem, we get that xn converges to c. Now, since we're assuming star holds, that's the right side of 3 of the if and only if, it must be the case that f of xn converges to f of c.  Right, that's what star tells me that if I take a sequence converging to c, f of xn converges to f of c. But each one of these, remember, is bigger than or equal to epsilon 0.  which is a contradiction, epsilon 0 is a positive number, and that
includes the proof of this theorem that gives us an equivalent way of stating continuity in terms of sequences. And just like for limits, this will allow us to use what we know about sequences to conclude analogous facts for continuous functions  So let's look at a non-trivial example of a continuous function. And also put this theorem to use this
previous theorem, functions,  f of x equals sine x and g of x equals cosine x, these are continuous functions. So their domain is a set of real numbers, so they're continuous at every real number, they're continuous at c for every c,
or real number.  So we're going to use this, well, we're not going to use this theorem just yet on this part,
we're actually going to prove sine is continuous directly from the epsilon delta definition, which is always good.  just give you a quick refresher on what you can prove just from the definition of
sign and cosine, and I'm not, I would usually put this to the class and see who remembers and who doesn't. So this is also supposed to be a unit circle, although it doesn't quite look like that.  the circle, and you arrive at a point on the
unit circle, which you, so it's an ordered pair, the first element you call cosine x, the second element you call sine x, so that's how sine of x is defined.  from the definition of sine and cosine from the unit circle, we have that, of course, for all x and R, sine x plus cosine
x plus cosine squared x is equal to 1.  And therefore, each of these individual things has to be less than or equal to 1, which
upon taking square roots means that, so you have these, now you can also make a better estimate for sine x when x is close to 0,  useful for x close to 0, which is the following that for all x sine x is less than or equal to the
absolute value of x just obtained by comparing the length of one side of a triangle from this picture with the length of the arc.  and go sum, formula, which says that sine of a plus b equals sine a cosine b plus cosine a sine b. And you also have the, I can't remember the name of the
exact the formula, I think it's  a difference to product or something of that
nature, which says sine of a minus sine of b, you can write, so this is using the previous formula, twice sine of a minus b over 2, cosine of a plus b over 2.  elementary properties of sine and cosine and cosine, we'll now show that f is, or that
sine of x is continuous, so first thing we want to show is that sine x is a continuous function,  So at c in R, we're going to show sine is continuous at c, let epsilon be positive, and now we have to say how to choose
delta, depending on this epsilon, choose delta to be epsilon. Now we'll use these elementary properties to show that this delta works.  if x minus c is less than delta, we now want to show that f of x minus f of c, sine x minus
minus sine c is less than epsilon. So sine x minus sine c, this is equal to by this last formula we have on the board over here, this is equal to twice sine x minus c over 2,  cosine x plus c over 2. And now this is the product of 2 times the absolute value of sine,
times the absolute value of cosine by the second property over here, cosine is always bounded by 1, so this is less than or equal to 2 times the absolute value of sine, x minus c over 2.  of that thing you're sticking in, so this is less than or equal to 2 times x minus c over 2, which equals x minus c. So now we're in business, we've
connected f of x to x minus c, so this is less than or equal to, so this is less than delta, which equals epsilon by our choice of delta.  i.e, sine x minus sine c is less than epsilon. So, thus function sine x is continuous at c. Now, we'll use this, and the theorem we showed a minute ago,  have I erased it? Yes, I have now, officially erased it, anyways, we use the previous
theorem that we proved for the equivalent of continuity and convergence of sequences to show that cosine is continuous.  let xn be a sequence converging to c, and we now want to show that cosine of x sub n converges to cosine of c.  we can conclude that cosine is continuous at c. Now, here's the thing, for all x and R, we have cosine of x is equal to sine of x plus pi over 2.  simply from this angle sum formula, take a equals x, b equals pi over 2, and
using that cosine of pi over 2 is 0. And this is what we'll use, and the fact that we know sine is continuous.  or 2 converges to c plus pi over 2. Now, this sequence x sub n plus pi over 2 converges to this number, and since sine is continuous, we have, by the previous theorem, that sine of this converges to this, and therefore, cosine of
coseign of x sub n plus
n plus pi over 2 converges to this number,  x sub n, which is equal to sine of x sub n plus pi over 2, converges to sine of c plus pi over 2, which equals cosine of c.  We've now shown that cosine is also continuous.  So maybe this is an example, rather than a theorem, but I'll state it as a theorem, let f of x be the function which
takes the value 1 if x is a rational 0 if x is not a rational.  then f is not continuous at every c and R. So first off, don't try to plot this using like math, math, math, math, math, or anything, because first off, computers can't deal with irrational numbers.  at 1, no matter what you stick into f, but OK, so you have this function, which is 1, if x is a rational, 0, if x is not a
rational number, if it's irrational, let's show it's discontinuous at every c, a different way, if you like, to state the theorem which I've already erased, so let me just state it,  differently, f is not continuous at c. So remember the two statements are equivalent if and only if their negations are equivalent. So f is not continuous at c, if and only if there exists a sequence x sub n.  such that xn's converge to c and f of xn, the sequence f of xn does not converge to f of c. So maybe it just doesn't converge at all, or maybe it converges to something
other than f of c. So this is just a restatement of the theorem we've already proven  but now using negations of the statements that
appeared on the f and only if and only if. So there's two cases to consider for this, so now we're going, so this is a statement of the theorem, a restatement of the theorem we're using, and now we're going to prove the theorem that I've stated here, so let c be an element of R, we're going to show that this function is discontinuous at c, there are two cases to
considerate, c is a rational number  or c is an irrational number, so k1, c is a rational number, let's show f is not
continuous at c. Now, we know that for every natural number n, there exists  element, x sub n, and the complement of Q, so an irrational number, such that c is less than x sub n is less than c plus 1 over n. So we proved this in an assignment. Between any two real numbers, I can find a rational number, an irrational number in between them. So that's what this statement says, for each n, I can find an irrational number between the number  or c in the number c plus 1 over n. Now, by the squeeze theorem, this is just a constant
sequence if you like, converging to c, this converges to c. And as n goes to infinity, this converges to c. So I get that the sequence x sub n converges to c.  because so xn converges to c, but if I look at f of xn, if I take the limit as n goes to infinity of f of xn, since all the xn's are not rational, they're irrational numbers, and I stick them
in to f, I get 0.  equals 0, and this does not equal 1, which equals f of c, because we're in the k set c is a rational number. So here we use the density of the irrationals to show that this function is not continuous at a rational number. And we'll do the same thing for the case that c is an irrational number.  I mean, it's the same proof, except now we essentially take compliments. We proved this theorem right after the Archimedean
property of R that for any two real numbers, I can find a rational number in between them.  d plus 1 over n. And again, by the squeeze theorem, it follows that xn converges to c. And if we look at the limit as n goes to infinity of f of x, so n, this is equal to all of these values  equals 0, which equals f of c, since c is assumed to be an irrational number. So this function is not continuous at every real number. So just terminology here, if you hear me say this, when I say something is not continuous, I'll
off and say, discontinuous.  OK, we're going to use this theorem, I keep saying this theorem, although I already already
arrased it, but the theorem that equates continuity at a point in the fact that every sequence converges, every sequence converging to c implies f of xn converges to f of c, we're going to use that theorem to get corresponding  theorems about continuity that look analogous to the statements we made about sequences, and then we'll
consider a case which has no analog for sequences  So let me say the following theorem, so suppose S is a subset of R, c is an
element of S, and I have two functions from S to R.  then the conclusion is, f plus g, the function f plus g is continuous at c, f times g is continuous at c.  of x does not equals 0 for all x in S, so I can divide by it, then f over g is continuous at c.  2, you can prove for yourself, and again, this just follows from this
characterization we have of a function being continuous at a point in terms of limits of sequences, and limits of sequences, we know well, we've proven all these properties about them.  or assuming f and g are continuous at c, so let's prove f plus g is continuous at c
by this sequential characterization, suppose xn is a sequence converging to c, then since f and g are continuous at c, this implies that the sequence  and says f of x sub n converges to f of c, and g of x sub n converges to g of c. And therefore, by the theorem we proved several lectures ago, that the sum of two convergent
sequences converges to the sum of the limits, you get that f plus g of x sub n, which is f of x of n plus g  converges to f of c plus g of c or function f plus g
evaluated c, and that's it. We've now shown that every sequence converging to c, f plus g of x sub n converges to f plus g of c. And similarly, for the others, although there's maybe a little bit of a small hiccup here in that you want to, well, no,  Right, so this follows, I was thinking of something else, don't worry about that, but they, 2 and 3 also follow similarly
using the sequential, the analogous sequential theorems.  However, we do have, so these are three natural operations we can do with two functions, we can multiply them, we can multiply them, we can divide them, just like what we had for sequences.  compose them. So the natural question is, is the composition of two continuous
continuous functions continuous? And the answer to that is yes, we have to state this carefully.  So let's write this a little bit different, a and b be a subset of R, c is an
element of a, and f will be a function from, let me get this right, f will be a function from a to R, and g is a function from a  b to a, so I'm getting this backwards. So when I compose these two, when I take f of g, f of g will be a function now from b to R.  is continuous at the point g of c, which is remember an element of a, then the composition f of g is continuous at c. So we'll use, again, this characterization in terms of c  sequences. We don't necessarily have to, we could have done it strictly speaking from the definition, but this is a nice
short way of proving this statement, so let xn be a sequence in b, so a value of elements of b, such that x sub n converges to c.  f of g limit as n goes to infinity of f of g of x sub n equals f of g of c.  at c, this implies that the sequence g of xn converges to g of c. Now, g of x sub n, this is a sequence now in a converging to an element of a.  since this sequence g of x sub n converges to g of c, and g, and g, and now f is continuous at g of c, this implies that f of g of x sub n converges to f of g of c, i.e.  by definition, the same is saying f of g of x sub n equals f of g of c. So we have an operation that we can't do with sequences, but this operation still
preserves continuity. So taking sums of continuous functions, maintains a continuous  and stays in the class of continuous functions, product of two continuous
functions is continuous, quotient is continuous, and now also the composition of two continuous functions is continuous.  give more examples of functions, which are continuous, so for example, for all n, a natural number, f of x equals x to the n is continuous as a function for x and R.  OK, so for n equals 1, f of x equals x, we've already done. That was one of the first examples of continuous
functions we did with ax plus b, so a equals 1, b equals 0 gives me this case.  inductive step, suppose that the function x to the m is continuous, and now we want to show x to the m plus 1 is continuous, then x to the m plus 1, this is equal to x times x
x to the m, and since x to the m is continuous,  and the function x, f of x equals x is continuous, the product of two
continuous functions is continuous, which by  the theorem we proved implies that x to the n plus 1 is continuous. So I keep saying continuous, but what I'm saying is for all c and R, x to the m is continuous at c. So maybe I should have written that down, but I think that
meaning should be clear enough.  inductive reasoning, you could also prove that for all n, a natural number, polynomials are continuous. omial a sub n, x to the n plus a sub n minus 1, x to the n minus 1 plus a sub
0 is continuous. So rather than write down the actual proof by induction, let's talk our way through it. So again, for n equals 1, this is just going to be some number times x, which we've already dealt with  in a previous example, so we know that's continuous, so that
settles the base case, now let's assume that we've proved this for n equals M, or let's assume this for n equals M, and look at a function with n equals M plus 1.  that's continuous because it's the product of a constant and a continuous
function by the previous example, so that would be continuous plus the lower order polynomial, which is continuous by assumption, that will be continuous by the theorem that we proved.  So, for example, the function f of x equals 1 over 3 plus sine x to the 4th, this is also continuous.  is non-zero, sine x is continuous, so sine x to the 4 is continuous, 3 is a continuous function, is just a constant, so the bottom as a function on its
own is continuous, and 1 over that function is continuous, as long as the bottom is never 0, which it's never 0, so again, by this theorem here, so we used the composition 1 to say that sine x to the 4 is continuous,  And we use that one, the theorem before that to show that 1 over 3 plus sine
x4 is continuous. So let me write this out real quick.  meaning the theorem that involves algebraic operations, 3 plus sine x of
4 is continuous and by the algebraic theorem again, since 3 plus sine x to the 4 is never 0 for all x and R,  is continuous. So next time, we'll look at some properties of continuous
functions, namely what are called the min and max theorems for continuous functions, so the great thing about continuous functions is if you look at them on closed and bounded intervals, they always  max and a minimum at some point, not just that the graph is bounded above or below, but there's a point where f reaches that
min and reaches that max, and then we'll also prove the intermediate value theorem, which says between f of a and f of a and f of b, and I take a number n  mean those two values, f of a and f of a and f of b, there exists a point in between them so that f
obtains that value. And this is extremely important, and we'll definitely see why later once we get to differentiability and continuity.