 OK, so I have to admit this is extremely awkward,
lecturing to an empty room, so I have to imagine there's somebody on the other end, actually listening to me, at some point, perhaps this is  YouTube stars have to go through at some point in their
career. So what is the purpose of this course? So this is for 1800, 1800a, real analysis.  really, I think the first primary purpose of this course is to gain experience with proofs.  which, or the second purpose, which is supposed to be a way to obtain the first
purpose is to prove statements about real numbers, functions and limits,  So this second part, this is the analysis part. So for the first few lectures, we're going to do what maybe to sum will be kind of
review,  And for most, and for most of you, a lot of this material in the first few
least of you lectures will be review, so it's a nice way to ease into the material and things will most definitely pick up after a few lectures.  So definition and because I use a lot of short hand, I will mostly write dfn from now on instead of the
entire word definition.  the collection of objects called elements or numbers. Now, this course is supposed to be probably the first really rigorous course in math that many of you will  with, so essentially everything that we talk about will be rigorously and
unambiguously defined, but we do have to start somewhere. And so maybe you think this word collection is a little ambiguous and perhaps you should, but to actually build up set theory from the ground up, would take us quite  on the scope of this class and too far field of the things that we want to do, or at least what I want to do. So a set is just a collection of objects called elements or
remember, there is the simplest set to define the empty set  is set with no elements, and we denote it by this symbol here, a circle with a dash through it.  let me introduce a few short-hand notation, we'll use the
out the course, I mean, quite honestly, this is a little bit of the fun of doing higher math, you get all these funny symbols, and a very accomplished mathematician at the University of Chicago, one time said, you're really only interested in the math where that has the symbols you like to write over and over and over again.  So some notation, a in this symbol, which looks like an E S, means a is an element of S, a with dash through this little E, means everything here.  So a is not an element of S, this up-sized down a means for all, a short-hand for all, backwards E means there exists, and a couple of more, if you see an arrow like this, this means  implies, so I've written down one thing, this implies the next statement, I'll put an arrow
between them, and an arrow going both ways means if and only if, meaning if I have a statement p, if and only if Q, that means a statement p implies Q  statement Q implies p. And if you need a quick refresher on basic logic, you can find that in the
appendate of the textbook.  and set a, another definition, the set a is subset of b, which we write a, this little symbol looks like a c, b, if every element in a is an
element in b, a, a little a's  in capital A means little a is in capital B. So two sets are equal, we write a equals b if a is a subset of b, and b is a subset  of a, and so, and a is a proper subset of b if a is a subset of b,  a does not equal b, and we typically write that by a and with a dash going through a line
underneath this c to signify that it's not equal. So think of it as not, so less than or equal to, but not equal to, is one way to think about it.  let me say something, since I'm now 1, 2, 3 definition's in, so definitions are a fact of life when it comes to math, in the beginning of any
subject, there's going to be a lot of definitions because we have to have objects we want to talk about, and we have to have these unambiguously defined objects. So it may seem like there's going to be a lot of definitions now, but this will let up, and we will start proving some theorems,  which are facts about these objects, these are the things that we're really after, we're not really after, just making definition,
definitions are meant to be a rigorous way of defining an object we're interested in studying, we're interested in proving theorems facts about.  a probably review, when we describe sets, we will use these braces and maybe list the elements in here, or we will
describe it as x in some set a satisfying  some property p of x, or we won't write this x in a part, we'll just write all objects x, x satisfying x as being an element of whatever
universe we're in, that satisfy property p of x. So again, you should read this as all x satisfying property p of x.  So the basic examples, and this is, you should expect this after kind of
seeing any kind of non-trivial definition, if you were here, I would ask you to call me out, so I have to police myself, but after every kind of semi-interesting definition, you should see examples.  or at least digest what these things are. So we have the natural numbers, which every one is
familiar with, since they started to count, 1, 2, 3, 4, and so on, we have the integers, which is 0, 1, minus 1, 2, minus 2. So all the natural numbers, along with their additive in-verses, along with a 0 element, an additive  the rational numbers, so this is written as m over n, such that m and n are integers, and n does not equal to 0, and we have R, the real numbers, which as of right now,  actually write down what they are in terms of set-building notation, in fact, this will be our first goal of the course is to
give a proper description or definition of what R actually is, but you can think of this as, as you did in calculus, as Q, along with  So rationals and irrationals, like pi 2 and these things, so this is fine to think about for now.  a subset of numbers of the form 2m minus 1, where m is a natural number, so this is just 1, 3, 5, and so on. And so note that we have the inclusions, natural numbers are contained in the integers, which are contained in the rational numbers, which are
contained in the real numbers.  You look at the history of why these things were thought up in the first place, they were thought up to solve polynomial
equations that you couldn't solve in the number system before.  the integers, and the real numbers were thought of, because I cannot solve the equation x squared minus 2 equals 0 in the
rational numbers. Now, I can't solve the equation x squared plus 1 equals 0 in the real numbers, which led to the creation of complex numbers, but we will not deal with complex numbers in this class, although hopefully if you keep setting analysis, you go on to  really a beautiful,
subjective study to this day. So as I said, let me write this here, our first goal, real goal of the class, and this is sum to keep in mind, we're not going to do it right now, our first real goal is to describe what R  I mean, if we're going to be proving statements about the real numbers, functions of
real numbers and limits, those limits that you learned in calculus, then we have to be able to really describe what we're starting with the real numbers.  sets, so there were some examples, we have few more definitions, the union of two sets, a and b, is the set which we write.  this is the set of all elements x, x is in a, or x is in b.  is the set a cap B, and this is a set of all x's, so that x is in a, and x is in b.  the intersection is just take the things that a and b have in common, the set difference of a with respect  a, back slash b, this is the set of all elements in a, such that x is not nb.  the set, kind of the next part is how I'm defining this set, this is a set of all elements in our
universe that is not in a. And when I say universe, I don't mean this universe necessarily, I mean, if we're looking at subset of R, the complement is, generally with respect  or if all of our sets are subsets of Q, then our
universe would be Q, the rationals, and we're taking the complement in there, two sets are disjoint if their intersection is empty.  So it took me quite a long time to figure out this
complement has an E in the middle as opposed to an I as in the complement you would give a friend. I had to do a lot of spell checking in my thesis when my advisor point of that out. So this is just something to keep in mind, this complement has an E in the middle of it.  let me just draw a quick picture. So this blob over here is a, this is a set b, this is a set c, in fact, let's make this a little more, let's keep c there.  that the lines going this way, but not
including this, this is a takeaway b, a back slash b, and so that was not meant to be along the same direction as this one, so let's go vertical, and everything with a vertical line, is a intersect b.  a backslash has the line's going this direction, a intersect has the line's
going this direction, a union b has the line's going vertical. And c is way over here, not touching any of a and b, so a, and c are disjoint,  and b and c are just wrong. They have nothing in common. So this is a lot of definitions. We have not proven a single statement yet, so it's about time we do,  probably one of the most basic theorems one can prove at the start of a real
analysis class or any class about proofs, this is analogous to when you write your first hello world program in a programming class.  and the statement is the following, so if a, b, c are sets, then I have several things I can say, the union of b and c taking their
complement, this is the intersection of the compliments  So the complement of the union is the intersection of the
compliments if I take their intersection and take the complement, this is the union of the complement. So the complement of the intersection is the union of the compliments. Now, these are compliments, meaning in some sense, taking a set difference with respect to the entire universe,  to some set a, so a take away b, union c, this is the same as a take away b, intersect a, take away c. Really, again, you should think of this as a special k sub 1, or at least if you were to write the proof, I'm not going to, because it's all
going to be contained in the first 2, then you would see it's really just  the proof of this guy, a takeaway b intersect c equals a, takeaway b,
union, a takeaway c. So again, for quick refresher about logic, I would look at the appendix of the textbook, in general, so let me make a few remarks  before we move on to the proof about typically how this is going to look, so this is a sum
remarks typically at theorem is a statement of the type p implies Q, let me write this out in English, if some statement p holds, then Q, for us, if I have any three sets  then I have these equalities between these
opposite of sets, so the general structure you'll see of the class is I have objects which I define unambiguously, I want to prove theorems now, meaning true statements about these objects, and the real  you start with, you assume p, meaning what you're given, the hypotheses, or the hypothesis p, and I'm going to put dots here,
through logic and
value  most definitely, most of the time, some calculations, you arrive at Q is true, and most proofs are
ended with this little box here. So most proofs have this structure. I take my hypotheses, and these hypotheses mean something  in terms of the definitions I have given, and now I need to use these unambiguous
definitions, along with logic, and maybe some calculations to conclude that statement Q is true. That is, the essence of a proof, that is all there is to it. Now, that doesn't mean it's a simple thing to learn how to do at the point of this course,  But the still down, that's what a proof is. And Q, so I said p, usually means something in terms of the definition we have, but also Q will usually
mean something in the definition that we've given. And so our job is to verify Q. So let's go with proving this theorem, and in fact, I'm only going to prove  property 1, property 2, 3, and 4, I'll likely
put on the homework. So B and c be set. So I mean, this is the only hypothesis I get. I'm trying to prove that B, union c, complement equals the intersection of the compliments. So what does that mean?  it's quite helpful, especially when you're first starting to do proofs to write down what you're actually trying to
prove. So even though I have this statement here, it's an equality between two sets, equality between two sets means something specifically.  is a subset of the other and vice versa. So that's what we have to prove. We have to prove that the left side, b-union c-complement is a subset of b-complement intersect, c-complement, and vice versa.  So that's what the equality means, that's what we have to prove. We have to prove those two statements now. And that's as distilled down as far as we can go. So let's prove this, now we'll prove this using, again, logic, and what these things actually are.  So let's prove this first statement here. So I have to show that every element in this set is an
element of this set. So I'll even write this down, as WtS, that means 1 to show, this is the first thing we'll show, as we go on, I'm not going to write as much as I'm doing  right now, but this is the first theorem proof you're seeing, so I should write down
quite a bit. So the first thing we want to show is we have this conclusion, that means every element here is an element here, so let x be in the union c compliment, and now we're going to trace what this means, and we'll eventually arrive at x is in this.  then x is not in b union c, that's just a definition of the complement. Now, x is not nb union c means x is not in b, and x is not in c.  and not in c. Now, this implies simply, again, by the definition of what it means to be in the
complement, x is in b complement, and x is in c complement. But this, again, is simply the definition of x being in b complement, intersect c complement,  So you see, we started off with an element in this guy, and we showed that it's also an
element of the right-hand side. So this, the union c complement is contained in b complement, intersect c complement. Now we want to do this other inclusion here,  Now, this is one of those rare situations where you get to essentially reverse the
entire argument and get what you want.  let's take something from here and show it's in here. So let x be in the intersection of the
compliments, then that means x is in b complement and x is in c complement, that means x is not in b, so that's this statement,  that's the definition of being in the complement, and x is not in c, that's, again, the definition of being in the
complement, now, just like we used here in this step, this is equivalent to, so really I should, in this statement, I should have written, this statement is equivalent to this statement, but we'll remove that, so x is not in b and x is not in c, this means x is not  and their union, which implies that x is in the complement of the union.  And since we've shown both sets are a subset of each other, that means by the definition of two sets being equal, they are equal.  Alright, so let's move over here.  And not everybody uses that little box to
finish or prove some people don't put anything. When I was in graduate school, I was a TA for the sky named Paul Sally, who was a fantastic teacher and really loved math  who would end. So an amazing story about this guy is when I was his TA, he was in his 70s, I think, but he had also had diabetes so he had lost both of his legs, beneath his knees, he was also legally blind, and he had a patch over one eye, so he  self often referred to himself as the pirate mathematician, but he would end his proofs with at least in his textbook, he didn't ask me to do this on the board, thankfully, he would end his proofs with a picture of himself with this cob pipe that he had, very much in the pirate  fashion, anyways, OK, moving on from things that in-proves, let's go on to a next subject induction. So induction is a way to prove theorems about natural numbers.  more of a tool rather than an interesting fact on its own. So let me state the theorem, and then we'll go over a couple of
examples on how to use induction. So let me recall from, I think I just erased it, n is the natural numbers, and it has an ordering,  meaning so we'll precisely define what ordering means, but just in your head, this means the usual thing, 1 is less than 2, is less than 3, is less than 4, so a property of the natural numbers, which will take as an axiom is the well-ordering property  So an axiom is not something you prove, you assume this about the objects that you've defined or are
studying up to this point. And so the statement is, if I take a subset of natural numbers,  which is non-empty, then S has a least element or smallest element. Now, what does this mean? Let me write this last statement out, i.e., there exists an x and S, St, I will
often write, meaning such that,  or so that such that x is less than or equal to y for all y in S. So every non-empty subset of the natural numbers has a small element. And we're going to take that as an axiom as just a property of the natural numbers, which will assume.  to prove, it's not really a, you'll often here call it as a principle of mathematical induction, but this will
statement as a theorem instead of a principle, whatever a principle is supposed to be.  to Pascal, or at least in its first rigorous
formulation, is let pn be a statement depending on a natural number n.  monoties that involves a natural number n, that could be our
statement p of n. Now we're going to assume, so what are hypotheses about this statement? What's our if? Assume that this statement satisfies two properties, this first property is usually referred to as a base case,  that is that p of 1 is true, and the second property is called the inductive step. So this statement satisfies the following property that if you assume p of m is true,  then you can prove that p of n plus 1 is true, so I have a statement which
satisfies both of these properties. And particular, since I'm assuming p of 1 is true, the second property p of 2 is true. And then, again, by the second property, p of 3 is true, and then p of 4, and then p of 5, and so if you follow that last line of reasoning,  means you should be able to guess what the conclusion of this theorem is, then pn is true for all natural numbers.  this theorem about induction. So we have our assumptions, although I said over there, let bc be sets, I'm not going to rewrite the
assumptions that we have about our statement p. We're just going to start trying to prove p of n is true for all n.  let S be the set of all natural numbers, such that p of n is not true. So what I want to show is that p of n is true for all n. So that's equivalent to saying we want to show,  that S is empty, set of natural numbers where p of n is not true, this is empty. This is equivalent to saying p of n is true for all n. And the way we're going to do this is, a another staple of mathematical proofs is trying to prove this by
contradictive  fiction. So what does that mean? I mean, make a few comments about what that means proof by a contradiction.  I'm going to
do a little bit of the
subsequence,  So in a proof by contradiction, so this is what I'm about to write down is not part of the proof, this is
commentary not to be included in the proof. What does it mean to say we're going to prove S is equal to the empty set by contradiction?  not false, but we want to assume that the negation of the statement we want to prove is true and then arrive at a false statement.  from this, we want to derive a false statement. And so if we were able to do that, then let me just say, again, you can check in the appendix, or you can just
believe me that,  the rules of logic then say that our initial assumption that S was not
empty as false to begin with. So rules of logic, meaning I cannot start from a true assumption  a logically consistent way, a false statement. That is, if we believe that the rules of logic we're using are
consistent, which that's a little bit hairy to talk about, but for our purposes of our class, you can believe me that the rules of logic we use, or at least  that the rules of logic we're going to use are consistent and sound. OK, so back to the proof at hand, we have this set of natural numbers where the statement is not true. We want to show it is empty, we're going to do it by contradiction, meaning we're going to assume the negation of the statement we want to prove, namely S is not empty, and we're going to derive a false
statement from that assumption.  that means that our initial assumption that S is non-empty is, in fact, false.  Now, ordering property of the natural numbers, S has a less element x. Now, what do we know about x?  S is a set where this property does not hold, x cannot be 1, because let me again rewrite that this fact that S is the least element, let me just reiterate that S has a
least element in the set. Now, x cannot be 1 because we're assuming the base case, meaning p of 1 is true.  since p1 is true, that means 1 is not in S, which means x is not 1. particular x must be bigger than 1. So x is some natural number out there bigger than 1, that's the least
element of this set S.  since x is the least element of S, so let me draw along the number line, we have 1, 2, 3, 4, out there is a
some magic point x, which is the least element of S, and the rest of the subset S lies to the right  because it's the least element of S, and therefore, x minus 1 cannot be in S. So since x is the least
element of S, and x minus 1 is less than x, this means that x minus 1 is not in S, otherwise, it would be a smaller element  So thus, what does it mean to not be in S? It means that p of x minus 1 is true. By the definition of S, this means p of x minus 1 is true.  about our statement p, this means that the next guy in line x minus 1 plus 1 is true, which is just x, which means that x is not in S.  So let me just recap from the assumption that S is non-empty, we've
derived two facts. 1, x has a least element in S, and that element is also not in S.  We've concluded there exists a natural number, which is both nS and not in S, and this is a false statement. You cannot have an object, a member that's both in the set and not in the set. And at the end of contradiction argument, I'll usually
put two
arels hitting each other.  therefore, our initial assumption that S is non-empty has to be false, and
therefore, S is the empty set. So I encourage you to go through that proof a little slowly, because maybe you got turned around by taking the compliments  scheme of how a proof by contradiction works, but don't spend too much time on it, because, as I've said, this theorem itself and its proof are not the thing we're really interested in, or at least it's not the most
interesting, it's more of a tool that we'll use to prove more interesting statements.  I guess I should include this here, this is false under the umbrella of logic,
meaning we're going to use previous statements we've proven to prove new statements.  If we want to prove some statement for all n, pn is true, and this theorem about induction, this theorem of induction,
tells us we just have to do two things.  OK, we have to prove the base case, and this is usually
easy, you just stick the number 1 into the statement that you want to prove, and that's the end of the story.  to prove is a more involved part, which is we have to prove that the statement that if p is true, then p of n plus 1 is true.  all our proofs we have to do. First, we have to prove p of 1 is true, and then we have to prove this
statement if p of m, then p of m plus 1. So again, this is usually referred to as the base case, this is the inductive step.  So another question I get at the beginning of a course, especially about proofs, because there's a lot of uncertainty about what you can assume is true, what can you use, what can you not use right now, at this point, you can use whatever you know about any of the algebraic properties about the real numbers  the rational numbers, and by algebraic properties, I mean, of a plus b equals c, then a plus b times d equals c times d, and what you know about inequality. So we're going to go much more in
death into ordering, which is what inequality is a part of, but you can use all the properties  you know about solving inequalities or manipulating
equalities, if I have 1 number is less than or equal to another number, then when I multiply both sides by a positive number that doesn't change the inequality.  anything about continuity, differentiation or
anything like that, but for now, you can use all the algebraic properties you know. So the first statement we're going to try and prove using induction is the statement that for all c, not equal to 1, for all n a natural number,  1 plus c plus c squared plus c to the n equals 1 minus c to the n plus 1 over 1 minus c. So this here is our statement p of n, it depends on a natural number n.  prove the base case p of 1, which I said is easy, and then we're going to
prove the second property, the inductive step, which is a little more involved, but not so much involved, at least in the beginning.  induction. So first, we will do the base case. And like I said, the base case is usually just
plug n n equals 1 and verify that p of n is true. And that's what we do. 1 plus c to the 1, which is the left-hand side, does, in fact, equal  1 minus c to the 1 plus 1 over 1 minus c, because this right-hand side, 1 minus c squared is 1 minus c times 1 plus c, the 1 minus c's cancel, and so the base case is proven.  Now, we do the inductive step. So we're going to assume that star holds for n equals M. So we're going to assume p of M. So assume that 1 plus c plus c to the M equals 1 minus c  over 1 minus c. Now we want to show, again, let's write out what we want to do, what's our plan, want to prove that this
equality that this line star holds  for n equals m plus 1. So again, this is what I wrote here, this is basically star
for n equals m. And let me call this second inequality 2 star. So this is my assumption for m n equals m.  OK, so let's take the left side for n equals n plus 1 and see if we cannot massage it to get the right-hand side for, I should say, the right-hand side for n equals n plus 1.  m plus c to the m plus 1, this is the m plus 1 case of the left-hand side of star, which we want to show is equal to the n
equals m plus 1 case of the right-hand side. Now, this is equal to, now we already know what this is equal to by our assumption. This is by the second star there, which is what we're assuming is true,  is equal to 1 minus c, m plus 1 over 1 minus c plus c m plus c m plus 1. And so now we just do a little bit of algebra, this is equal to 1 over 1 minus c, m plus 1 plus c, plus 1, minus c, m plus 2, over 1 minus c, those cancel, and I'm left with 1 minus c  to the M plus 2, and I'll write it just so that you can see this is really the
M plus 1 case. So again, we arrived at this first step by our assumption, this second star equation,  So, thus star holds for n equals M plus 1. So by induction, or really I should say, the theorem of induction that we proved, our
equality between those two objects or two expressions  of all it for all n.  I'm going to
do it.  OK, so let's do one more example of using induction.  let's prove if c is a real number bigger than or equal to
minus 1, then for all n, a natural number, 1 plus c to the n is bigger than or equal to 1 plus n times c.  all right, so we're going to do this by induction again, that means we need to prove the base case and
we need to do the inductive step. So base case, as always, so this is just right here, we're going to do this by induction.  this, again, n equals 1 is clear just by looking at it, 1 plus c to the 1, in fact, equals 1 plus 1
plus 1 times c. So it's certainly bigger than or equal to 1 plus n times c. So I think that's the last star as I'll use for this lecture.  or an equal star star star star holds for n equals 1. So that's our base case. Now, we're going to assume that this inequality holds for n equals m and try to prove that it holds for n equals m plus 1.  We're assuming this when n equals m, so 1 plus c to the m is bigger than or equal to 1 plus m times c, and we want to prove this inequality with n equal to m plus 1, and we're just assuming this guy.  equals M plus 1, one way to do that is this left side, I want to look at the n equals M plus 1
1 side and see what we can do with it. So again, this is a calculation part and logic, so we have 1 plus c to the M plus 1, so that's the n equals M plus 1 side of this, this is equal to 1 plus c  times 1 plus c to the m. Now, we're assuming, again, this inequality, this is the n equals m case, so we can use it. So we're assuming it, we use it, and since c is bigger than or equal to minus 1, 1 plus c is non-negative. So this thing is bigger than or equal to this thing, so if I multiply both sides by 1 plus c, I
precertain the inequality, so this is bigger  than or equal to 1 plus mc. Again, this just follows from essentially the
assumption multiplied through by 1 plus c. And now, so now I'm going to finagle this, so let me just  I'm not doing anything different here, I'm just going to
array write this over here so that I can have a chain of inequality. So I have 1 plus c to the m plus 1 is greater than or equal to 1 plus c, 1 plus mc.  equal to what I'm about to write here, that means the previous thing on here is equal to what I'm
about to write here. This is a typical, a fashion in writing down inequalities, or I guess practice. So this is equal to 1, so just doing the algebra, n plus 1 times c plus m times c squared,  Now, this part is exactly the n equals n plus 1 side of this, and I have a little room to give, because now this is plus something that's non-negative.  So again, I'm kind of writing a lot here, I will stop writing as much as the course goes on, and I encourage you, especially in the beginning, to write all the
steps and logic. So again, I'm not rewriting anything, I'm just summarizing what I've done here,  Now, this right-hand side, so I have this is bigger than or equal to this, and this right-hand side, since I have a number plus something
non-negative, M times c squared, M's a natural number, this is bigger than or equal to 1 plus M plus 1 times c, plus 1 plus c to the M plus 1 is greater than or equal  which is the n equals M plus 1 case. So by induction, this inequality, triple star
holds for all n.  Alright.