 OK, so let's continue with our discussion about continuous functions, and we'll
continue to, first let me recall a few facts.  this is not a definition, but this was a theorem we proved last time, so I won't recall the
definition of continuity, but we proved this theorem characterizing continuity, and if we have a subset of R, an element in S, and a function S going from S to R,  continuous at c if and only if for every
sequence x sub n of elements of S such that xn converges to c, we have limit as n goes to infinity, if x sub n  equals f of c. So this was a theorem we proved last time. And let me recall an older theorem, which I said was very powerful, but never really
gave you any sort of powerful application, which will start giving some powerful applications now, but this was the Bolzano-Weierstrass theorem,  which states that every bounded sequence of real numbers has a convergent subsequence.  a, and in the next lecture, to prove that a continuous
function on a closed and bounded interval is very well-behaved.  So if f from a closed and bounded interval is continuous, meaning it's continuous at every point,  will be haved. And for example, the first thing that we're going to prove,
will be a combination of two theorems is that the image of a closed and bounded interval by a continuous function is another closed and bounded interval, and E could equal d, so this could  just be a single point, for example, if f is a constant function, and the
imagine would just be a single point. So this is a theme of this lecture and the next lecture.  intermediate value theorem, the min-max theorem will tell you that f of an interval is always
contained in an interval of this type, and then the intermediate value theorem will tell you everything in between two certain bounds is attained by f.  what it means for a function to be bounded, we say that a function from a subset S to R is bounded, so here S is a subset of R, is bounded if there exists a non-negative b, such that for all x and S, f of x is bigger than or equal to b.  So for example, if I take f of x to be x plus 1 and here S is the closed and bounded
interval 0, 1, then f is bounded.  mean, well, f of x equals 3x equals 3x plus 1, so at 1, it's going to be 4 and pictorially a function is
bounded if the graph is always bounded between two real numbers. And for us, for f of x, it's always bounded between 0 and 4 in terms of this absolute value,  x plus 1, this is less than or equal to by the triangle inequality,
3 times the absolute value of x plus 1, x is between 0 and 1, so it's absolute value is bounded by 1.  whenever we see definition, we should try to negate it to
understand it better so f is unbounded if for all b bigger than or equal to 0, there exists some bad x such that f of x in absolute value  is bigger than or equal to b. So if a bounded function is supposed to have a graph bounded
bounded between two real numbers, an unbounded 1 is 1 in which, at least part of the graph is going off to plus infinity or minus infinity, so most basic example, we could think of is, let's say, if we want it to go from  0, 1 to R, again, we could take f of x to be, well, 0 at x equals 0, 1 over x, if x is not equal to 0.  goes up to infinity as you approach x equals 0. So why is this unbounded? We have to verify the
negation of the definition, so claim f is unbounded, let b be bigger than or equal to 0, we now have to find an x in 0, 1 so that 1 over x, or so that f of x is bigger than b,  this is pretty easy, so let x be in R such that 1 over x is bigger than b. So if b is equal to 0, we take x to be
anything in 0, 1 that's  Fair enough, i.e., x, ln, 1 over b, so if we like, we could make this explicit, so I'll just keep it here.  going to be bigger than b. And that's it.  Several of these proofs will have the same flavor of what we're going to
try and prove, and this one is a nice one to start off with, and necessary. So my first theorem that I want to prove about continuous functions on a bounded interval  closed and bounded interval, is that they're bounded. So if I have a function from a, b to R is continuous,
meaning it's continuous at every point, and a, b, then f is bounded.  So the proof of this theorem, and several of these theorems will be by contradiction. And the fact that we're on a closed and bounded interval, or that we're in this setting is what allows us to use
Bolzano-Weierstrass, this powerful too.  So, assume, and so, like I said, this proof is by contradiction, that the conclusion is false.  which the precise meaning is right here, for all b, there exists an x and S such that for every b, I can find an x in S so that the absolute value of f of x is bigger than or equal to b.  then for all n, a natural number, so I'm taking b to be n, there exists x sub n, a, b, such that f of x sub n, an absolute value, is bigger than or equal to n.  then xn is bounded, because it's in this close and
bounded interval a, b, so by Bolzano-Weierstrass, there exists a subsequence, xn sub k of this sequence x sub n  and x and R such that limit as k goes to infinity of x sub n sub k equals x. Now, I claim that this x is actually in the interval a, b, since x of n  sub k is a subsequence of x sub n, which are in a sub b, or a, a, c, so a half for all k, x sub n sub k is between a and b, this implies by what we know about limits that limits respect inequalities, and therefore, a is less than or equal to limit  as k goes to infinity of x sub n sub k, which is less than or equal to b, and this is x. So i.e, x is between a and b. Another way, instead of going through this, I believe we did in the assignment, that an interval of this form  is closed, and you prove that for a closed set, so when I say an interval of this
form is closed, I mean it's a closed set, and you proved on the assignment that for a closed set, if I have a convergent sequence, then the limit of that sequence has to belong to the set.  this subsequence, x of n sub k, it's converging to x, which is in a, b, and I know the function I haven't used anything about f
y, and I'm assuming it's continuous.  since f is continuous, and the x sub n sub k's converge to x, as k goes to infinity, I know by the theorem up top over there, that f of x equals the limit of f of x  x sub n sub k, and therefore, the absolute value of x is equal to the limit as k goes to infinity
of the absolute values, but now, f of x sub n is always bigger than or equal to n. That's how the x sub n's were chosen. We assume that f is unbounded, and therefore, all of these x sub n's and a, b were chosen so that f  sub n is bigger than or equal to n. So this is bigger than or equal to n.  So let's see, how to write this without. So we'll write it this way. I don't want to write the limit of something equals infinity because we haven't said what it means for the limit of something to
equal infinity.  exists, which implies that the sequence is bounded, a convergent
sequence is always bounded, and since n sub k is always less than or equal to f of x sub k, and this is a bounded sequence, this tells me that the sequence  n sub k is bounded, but this is impossible. Remember, the form of a subsequence, the n sub k's are
increasing integers, which is a contradiction, and this is always because n sub 1 is always less than n 2 is less than n 3 and so on, so these are always getting bigger without bound.  So again, here's the structure of the proof, we want to assume some property of f. So we assume not, we get this bad sequence of numbers in this interval and using Bolzano-Weierstrass, we get to pass to some limit x and the continuity of f at x, essentially  the badness of the sequence x sub n, we'll see another argument where it's kind of the same flavor.  absolute min's and absolute max is R, so let f be a function from S to R, S is a non-empty subset
of R, we say f achieves, f achieves an absolute max.  let me write it this way, an absolute min at c in S, if f of c sits below f of x for all x in S, if for all x in S, f of c is less than or equal to f of x.  choose absolute max at d and S if f of d sits above everything, every x you stick into f if, for all x in S, f of x is less  less than or equal to f of d. So for example, so what's the picture that goes with this, let's imagine we're on a closed
and bounded interval, then  d, so f achieves absolute max at d, the graph of f sits below the value f of d, and sits above the value f of c.  Now, absolute max and min's at points are so that the function is always sitting above f
evaluated at that point, just a quick warning.  So this is 1, 2, 3 halves. Then this function does not have an absolute max, does not achieve an absolute max or
achieve an absolute min on the set 1, 2. What you would like to say is that 1, that  f achieves an absolute min at 1, but the graph does not sit above f
evaluated at 1. Just like over here, the graph of f does not sit below f evaluated at 2. So absolute f achieves an absolute min at a point if the whole graph sits above f evaluated at that point, not necessarily
some number sits below the whole graph, that's what boundedness  So I just want to clarify that distinction between the graph of a function being bounded
bounded below by a number and f achieving a min at a certain point. So for example, the graph of this function is bounded below by 1, but f does not achieve an absolute min at c equals 1.  OK, so our next theorem is the min-max theorem for continuous functions, which is the following.  let f be a function from a, b to R, if f is continuous, it's continuous at every point in a, b, then f achieves absolute min,  an absolute max on a, b. So another way of stating this, so let's just make this a mark, says that there exists c, d, and a, b, such that f of a, b is contained in,  f of c, f of d. So we'll do the proof of an absolute max and the proof for the absolute
min, I'll leave to you, it's a simple  kind of change in the argument that's not too difficult. And again, we're going to use this powerful tool, Bolzano-Weierstrass, that
allows us to go from an arbitrary sequence in a, b to a convergent subsequence.  And if this function is continuous, then by what we've proven where, over there, this implies f is bounded, then the set E, given by the range of f, so f of x  x is in a, b, this set is bounded above, if the absolute value of f of x is always less than or equal to sum b, then f of x is
always bounded above by b for all x and a, so this set is bounded above.  be the supremum of e, which exists, because the real numbers have the least
upper bound property, whenever we have a non-empty subset, which is bounded above, we can always find a supremum.  of elements of this set E converging to L. And to express that, that means there exists some
sequence of elements, so there exists a sequence of the form f of x sub n such that limit as n goes to infinity of f of x sub n equals L.  Now, we would like to show that L is equal to f of d for some number d. And how we're going to do that is, well, this is the x sub n's are just a, b, so we can pass to a sub sequence, which converges to
some number, call it d, and then we need to show that f of d equals L, and that's where we use continuity, and then that's the whole proof.  which we saw a little bit over here, we passed a subsequence, and then we get to say that the limit of this subsequence has the same
property as the original sequence.  a sequence of the sequence x sub n, and as before, same argument, and limit d, but as before d will be in the set a, b.  such that limit as k goes to infinity of x sub n sub k equals d. So we use Bolzano-Weierstrass pass the
subsequence of the x sub n's and a convergent subsequence, and all of these x sub n sub k's are between a and b, so their limit d will be between a and b.  But now, since f is continuous at d, it's continuous at every point in a, b, so it's
certainly continuous at d, f of d, this is equal to the limit as k goes to infinity of f of x of n sub k, since the x sub n sub n sub k's are converging to d.  x sub n sub k, this is also a subsequence of the sequence f of x of n. And f of x of n is a convergent
sequence, so any subsequence has to converge to the same thing, since f of x sub n converges to L, and f of n, so k is a sub  And, remember, what was L? L was the sup of E. And therefore, for all x and a, b, f of x is less than or equal to f  which means f achieves an absolute max at the n absolute min is similar, and I'll leave it to you.  So just rerunning through the proof, we did use the fact that a continuous function is bounded, and we extracted the sup, if you like, the range of f, and so by this exercise we did in one of the
assignment, means that this supremum is equal  to the limit of f of x sub n's, we would like to show L is equal to f of d for some d, so we passed a subsequence of the x
of n's that does converge to something in the interval a, b, and we can show using the continuity of f, and how this original sequence was chosen, that f at that point is actually equal to the supremum of that set, and therefore, f achieves a absolute max  as beginning students of math, one of the things we should be curious about is what hypotheses are needed and what are not in the statements of theorems.  the theorem that f is going from this closed and bounded
interval to R, and that f is continuous. So what happens if we drop one of those hypotheses is the conclusion still true that f achieves an absolute max and absolute min. So this example that I drew right here shows that we need to have the function be continuous in order for it to achieve an absolute max and
absolute min on a closed and bounded interval.  it also needs to be on a closed and bounded interval.  from S to R, can we drop the assumption that S is equal to this closed and bounded
interval, meaning could it be say an open interval, does the same conclusion hold.  And the answer is no, simple example is, if I take the function f of x equals 1 over x minus 1 minus x, and on the
open interval 0, 1, so  What does this guy look like? 0, draw a dotted line there, here's 1, and the graph shoots up to positive infinity as you approach 0, and as you approach 1.  1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, so this function
this function does not achieve a absolute
sub n or absolute min or absolute max, but it is continuous on this interval,  are necessary for the theorem to be true. Now, they are not the most
precise way of stating this theorem, you could replace a closed and bounded interval with what's called a compact set, which maybe I'll put in the assignment or on the midterm, depending on where there's room, but just in the setting of intervals, the interval has to be closed and bounded,  and the function has to be continuous for this
theorem to hold true, so that's what I wanted to get at.  mark here is that there exists two numbers c and d and a, b so that f of a, b is
contained in f of c, f of d. c would be where f achieves an absolute min, d would be where f achieves an absolute max.  So now the question becomes, do I hit everything in between? Does this conclusion
become equality, and I gave the game away at the beginning of the lecture by saying, yes, it will, but that's actually a theorem.  call that in the notes, but now we're going to move on to the intermediate
value theorem, and first we're going to do what looks like a special case, and then we'll prove the general case, so this theorem, which I'm actually  in the textbook, but I'm going to call it this, which I'll call the bisection
mechanity is the following, let f be function from a, b to R if f of a is less than 0, and so  be continuous, so we're always in the continuous setting for this
section, so if f of a is less than 0 and f of b is bigger than 0, then there exists  c in the interval a, b such that f of c equals 0. So the picture that goes along with this is, here's a, b, here's f of a, f of b is positive, and therefore, if it's continuous, and you believe the definition of a
continuity is the fact that is that I don't have  pick up my piece of chalk, it pains me to say this, but that's, again, not the
efficial definition, but when you keep in your head, since somebody probably told you that at some point, if I don't have to pick up my piece of chalk, then eventually I have to cross the x axis, and therefore, at this point c, f of c will be 0.  is by what in calculus books call the bisection method.  of numbers a in and b in with special property, so I'm first going to tell you what a1 and b1 are, a1 is just going to be a, b1 is going to be bb, and so now I'm going to
to choose the next element in the sequence, the element in the sequence before.  first to find two sequences, a, n, and b, and so let me tell you how to do that. And the way we're going to choose this is so that f of a sub n is always less than 0, and f of b sub n is
always bigger than or equal to 0, and there obtained from the previous two guys by taking  midpoint, so by setting the ones before. So to get this started, a1 will be just a, b1 will be bb, OK? Now, for in a natural number, we're going to define, so we know a1, so now I'm going to tell you how to define a2, based on now, a1, but what I'm about to write down  a3, since you now know how to do a2, so I'm going to write it this way for
n a natural number, knowing a sub n, b sub n, we define a sub n plus 1, and b sub n plus 1 as follows,  So if f of a sub n plus b sub n, so the midpoint between the two guys that I already know, so if you like, take n to be 1 for when you first
read how to define a sub 2, say, but what I'm writing down implies to every n,  So we take f of a sub n plus b sub n over 2 to be, if this is bigger than or
or equal to 0, then we define a sub n plus 1 to be a sub n plus 1 to be the midpoint.  of the midpoint is less than 0, then a sub n plus 1 is going to be the midpoint, and b sub n plus 1 will be the previous point. So let me, in fact, so this is how you define the sequence in general, let's walk through what this means
what this means just for n equals 2.  so that you get the idea, maybe I should have done this first. So let's draw a picture to go, in fact, I don't need this axis, I'll just be, and this is a sub 1, this is b sub 1.  So we know that f of a sub 1 is less than 0, f of b sub 1 is bigger than 0, which is certainly bigger than or equal to 0 if it's bigger than 0, now we look at the midpoint, and based on the sign of this guy, we'll be how we define a2 and b2.  let's suppose that f of this thing is less than 0. Then I take a2 will be a1 plus b1 over 2, and b2 will be b1. And now I look at the midpoint of these two guys.  f of b2 is bigger than 0, so I'm in the picture before, except now I'm at half the
distance between the two endpoints. And so I look at this point now, a 2 plus b2 over 2, and I look at the sign of that, and let's suppose f of this thing is bigger than or equal to 0,  a3, and this point will now be b3, and what I have is f of a3 is less than 0, f of b3 is bigger than or equal to 0. So the point is that the left end point is always negative when I stick it into f, the right end point is always
not negative when I stick it into f, and that the distance  between the two midpoints is always getting cut in half by the
previous distance before, but we're always in the picture, in the setting we were in the step before.  the sequence of a n's and bn's. So for all n, they're always bounded between the original
2n points, not only that the a sub n's are always moving to the right. Remember, a sub n is always getting replaced by the midpoint between a and a sub n and b sub n, possibly,  saying the same. So a sub n is always less than or equal to a sub n plus 1. So in fact, let me write it this way. We always have a sub n is less than or equal to b sub n. We always have a is less than or equal to a n plus 1, which is less than or equal to
a, which is less than or equal to a  n, and then we also have, so for all n, b, all right, I'm making a mess of what I'm writing down. So let's start this over. So the first property I want to write, for all n in natural numbers,  b, a sub n is always less than or equal to a sub n plus 1, and b sub n plus 1, remember, whenever if we're going to change b, it's always to change it to the midpoint between the previous
guy and the a from the previous step, so this is always less than or equal to b  And now 2, if I look at the difference, this is always equal to 1, 1,  So one of these are getting change to the midpoint. So if it's a sub n plus 1, then b sub n plus 1 minus a sub n plus 1 is b sub n minus a sub n plus b
sub n plus b sub n over 2, which gives me this.  construction, f of a sub n is less than 0, and f of b sub n is bigger than or equal to 0. So I hope this is clear.  1, but I'm just stating it as clear from the construction,
and hopefully it is. So what does this give us?  bounded because they're always bounded between a and b, monotone
sequences, a sub n is increasing, b sub n is decreasing. Thus, there exists limits, so  I'm going to call them c and d, but it has nothing to do with the c and d
from over here, thus there thus these sequences converge, i.e., there exists element c and d in a, b, such that limit as n goes to infinity of a  n equals c, again, the a sub n's and b sub n's are between a and b, so their limits will also be
between a and b, b sub n equals d. Now, I claim c equals d, why should this not come as a surprise  well, the a n's and bn's are getting very close, they're always the distance between
any two of them is always getting halfed.  And therefore, this equals 1 over 2n minus 1, b sub 1 minus a sub 1, equals 1 over 2 to the n minus 1, b minus a.  to the limit as n goes to infinity of a sub n minus b sub n equals the limit as n goes to infinity of 1 over 2 to the n minus 1, b minus a, 1 over 2 to the n minus 1 is converging to 0 times this fixed number, b minus a equals 0. And therefore, these two numbers, these two limits, c and d
equal to each other,  So this step here is by the second property here. And now we're essentially done using the third property by 3 and continuity by look at f of c,  since the a sub n's are converging to c, this is equal to and f of a sub n is always less than 0, so it's limit is less than or equal to 0.  is equal to f of b sub n, and the f of b sub n's are always not negative, so their limit is also
or bigger than or equal to 0. So I've shown that this number, f of c is less than or equal to 0, and then it's also bigger than or equal to 0, and therefore, f of c equals 0.  So we use the why I put the bisection method here is because we use the bisection
meat that to prove this theorem, which looks like a kind of a special case of a certain intermediate value property, meaning that I can always find something that if I have that I can always find something in the interval  that achieves something in between f of a and f of a and f of b, in this
case is just 0, but I can, in fact, upgrade this, this is the following theorem due to Bolzano's intermediate value theorem,  R be continuous, B continuous, if y is between f of b. So let's say, so we're in one of two cases, let's say f of a is less than f of b, if y is between f of a and f of b,  then there exists a c and a, b such that f of c equals y, if f of a is say bigger than f of b, and we take something in between the same
conclusion holds,  So in short, if I take anything between the value of the function at
evaluated at the two endpoints, a and b, then the function achieves that value at some point.  So if I take any y between here, f has to cross this
horizontal line, and it's achieved at some point c. And we'll deduce this from, so this looks like a special case of this intermediate value theorem  If f of a is less than 0, f of a is bigger than 0 and y is equal to 0, but in fact, you can reduce this
general statement to that special case just by a simple trick. So proof, suppose f of a is less than f of b. So we're in this first case, and y is in f of a, f of b.  let g of x be f of x minus y. This is not a function of x and y, y is a fixed number between f of a and f of b.  continuous. So sum of two continuous functions is continuous, f is a continuous
function by assumption, this is just a constant minus y, so their sum is also continuous. But now if we look at g of a, this is equal to f of a minus y, now y is bigger than f of a, since y is an f of a, so this is less than 0,  and g of b is equal to f of b minus y is bigger than 0, and therefore, by the previous theorem, there exists a c and a, b, such that g of c equals 0, which means  And the proof assuming f of a is bigger than f of b is similar, you just now
put y here minus f of x, or you put, now you define g of x to be y minus f of x.  look at g of x equals y minus f of x. So Bolzano's intermediate value theorem tells us,  that if I take any value between the function
evaluated at the two endpoints, then that value is achieved by something in between a and b, and therefore, this will, in fact, give us that f of a, b is equal to f of c, f of d for some c and d.  from this, it's continuous if f, local, n at c,  not local, absolute min, absolute min at c and absolute max at d, then the image by f of a, b is equal to f  f of d, and what's the proof? Well, apply Bolzano's intermediate value theorem to f now going from the possibly
smaller interval c, d, it could be dc or cd, depending on if  thing that I have to stick into f to get the min and the thing I have to stick in to f to get the max is smaller than the other, so apply the Bolzano's intermediate value theorem to this function, now just restricted to this
smaller closed interval, it's still continuous, and that's the proof.  So maybe I was a little bit too fast with that. So let me just say a couple of more words about this.  everything between the two values, f of c and f of d is achieved by f on this interval.  of this larger interval, and since we already know that f of a, b is
contained in f of c, f of d, and now we've proven the reverse inclusion, this implies that f of c, f of d, equals f of a, b, and that's the proof.  stop there, next time, we'll finish with a few remarks about an application of the intermediate value theorem, and then we'll move on to uniform continuity.