 Last time, so we're talking about a set of real numbers, and last time I stated the
following theorem about the existence and properties of R that make it special, so the theorem  there exists a unique ordered field with the least upper bound property,  containing the rational number. So remember, a field was a set that had the operations plus and multiplication, an ordered field, also this set has an order on it, and this order interacts with the operations of a
addition and multiplication in the natural way, and the least upper bound
property means every  non-empty subset, which is bounded above, has a supremum in the set. So the least upper bound property, meaning the supremum belongs in R, not
necessarily in the non-empty set, which is bounded above. And we saw last time that Q, the rational numbers,
does not have this property by looking at  that set Q positive, a positive, a rational, Q squared less than 2, that set was bounded above, but didn't have a supremum in
rational numbers because the square root of 2 essentially is not a rational number, and the square root of 2 would be the supremum.  and soon turn to limits. So as I said, in the beginning, limits are the central
objective study in analysis, that's what analysis is, the study of limits.  think kind of simple about the real numbers, so an extremely simple fact about the real numbers is it's not
discrete like the integers are. So for the integers, if I take one integer and another, it's not necessarily the case that there's an integer strictly in between them, there's not an integer between 0 and 1.  it's a field, so an ordered field, so what's this simple fact, if x, y are real numbers, and x is less than y, then there exists a real number R, little R, so that x is less than R is less than y.  x plus y over 2. OK? All right, that's not so surprising. Now, this statement here is also true if I replace R with rational numbers, namely if I have two rational numbers, 1 less than the other, then there exists a rational number in between x and y.  is the following is that if x and y are in R and x is less than y, then I'll put a question mark over that, does there exist an R and Q such that x is less than
R is less than y?  I can't necessarily define R by this formula here and
guarantee that R will be rational. So for example, if x equals root 2, and say y equals 2 root 2, then x plus y over 2 equals 3 halves root 2,  which is not a rational number, because if it were a rational number, then I can
multiply through by two-thirds and say square root of 2 is a rational number. So all of that to say that simply by doing this trick of just taking the average, does not necessarily mean that if I take two real numbers, 1 less than or the other, then there exists a rational number between them.  one of the basic facts about R is that the answer to this question is yes, and that the, in some sense, the rational numbers are, dense in the real numbers, for any two
real numbers, I can find a rational in between.  is called the Archimedean property, so theorems as to parts, first is
called Archimedean property of R, and the statement of this is if x and y are in R, and x is positive,  a natural number n such that n x is bigger than y. And then the second part of this theorem is the statement that the rationals are then, that the answer to this question is yes, so it's  the density of the rationals, so it's state that if x and y are in R, and x is less than y, then there exists a rational number little R, such that x is less than R is less than y.  So let's prove the first part of this theorem, the Archimedean property, so what do we have to use to prove this theorem just what we know about the real numbers, the fact that it's an ordered
field with the least upper bound property? And you'll see how this least upper bound property plays a major role in all of these elementary things we prove about R.  restate our hypothesis, so suppose x and y are in R, and x is less than x is bigger than 0.  show the word show you should read as synonymous with proof that there exists a natural number n such that n is bigger than y over x, that's just restating that.  this is, again, this is our hypothesis, which we will assume throughout the proof, the thing we're trying to
prove is this statement here, the second sentence, so this is the thing that we will negate, we will not negate the hypothesis, we're negating what we want to prove in the end, and then arriving at a false statement, therefore showing our conclusion is true.  assume that the second statement is false, again, we're
assuming the first statement, so suppose not i.e., for all n, a natural number, n is less than or equal to y over x, right?  that's bigger than y over x. OK, so then that means then the natural numbers as a subset of the real numbers,  Now, the set of natural numbers is a non-empty subset of R, which is bounded above, therefore, it has a supremum.  call it a and r. So since a is the supremum of n, anything smaller than n, a cannot be an upper bound for the
natural numbers, because remember a is a supposed  to be the least upper bound, anything smaller than that cannot be an upper bound for the
natural numbers, is not an upper bound for n, but what does that mean? So if a minus 1 is not an upper bound for n, that means there must exist some integer in n, which is strictly bigger than a minus 1,  exist a natural number, call it M, such that a minus 1 is less than m. But then this implies that a is less than m plus 1, which implies that a is not an upper bound  for the natural numbers, because m plus 1, n's an integer, a natural number, so m plus 1's a natural number, and I've just
bound a natural number bigger than a, that means a can't be an upper bound for the natural numbers, but and therefore, a does not equal the sup of n, and this is a contradiction, because a is defined as a sup of n.  So from the assumption just to recap, just from the assumption that for all natural numbers n, n is less than or equal to y over x, we concluded that it has a supremum, that's not it's supremum. So that's a false statement, and therefore, our
assumption that for all natural numbers n is less than or equal to y over x, that must be false, and therefore,  n, which is bigger than y over x, which is what we wanted to prove. OK? So for the second theorem, the density of rational numbers, so we have three cases to consider.  x is less than y, there are three cases, all of a, x is less than 0 is less than y, b, 0 is bigger than or equal to x
is less than y, and c, x  is less than y is less than or equal to 0. So we want to find a rational number between x and y. So for this case, this is pretty simple. We just take R to be 0. So I'm not going to say anything about k sub a.  so suppose x is bigger than or equal to 0 and less than 1, then by a p, I'll refer to, so that'll be a short-hand notation for the Archimedean property, so part 1, which we've already
proven is true, by the Archimedean  property, there exists a natural number n, such that n times y minus x is bigger than 1.  there exists an integer L, and a natural number L, such that L is bigger than n times x, thus the set of all
entity of natural numbers k, such that  k is bigger than and x is non-empty. So this is a subset of the natural number, so it has a least element by the well-ordering
property of the natural numbers, S has a least element  M, now what does this mean? What does M have to satisfy? What we're going to show is that M over n is, in fact, a rational number that is between x and y.  made, once we found this natural number little n, so that n times y minus x is bigger than 1, what does this mean? This means n times y is bigger than n
x plus 1, so our goal is then to find this stuff in brackets you should not consider as part of the proof, this is me trying to
explanate to you  where from here, we would like to go to conclude the proof that there exists a rational number
between y and x. So we have this inequality, the Archimedean property tells us there's a natural number that satisfies this. So what we would like to do is find another natural number, and I'm foreshadowing what's to come, a natural number M, well, let's not, I don't want you to give you any false hopes  I mean, they're not false, so it'll happen in a minute, but let's call this j. So that two things happen, n times x is less than j, and j is less than or equal to n x plus 1. So for able to find such an integer j
satisfying this,  these two inequalities, then from this inequality, we would get that n y is bigger than, or this is bigger than n x plus 1, which is bigger than or equal to j, which is bigger than n x, i.e. So let me just rewrite this, n x is less than n
j is less than n times y, or in other words, x  is less than j over n is less than y, and here's our rational number, which we would choose. So that's the game plan, which maybe I should have said, right after I came up with this integer little n, you may be asking why come up with this integer little n, well, we have to start
start somewhere in the Archimedean property gives us this, and this somehow gives us  scale, at least the scale 1 over n to work on, but anyway, so going back to the proof, so we have, by the well-ordering
property of the natural numbers, this set S, which is a set of all natural numbers so that k is bigger than nx, has a least element little m.  means m is in S. So since m is in S, this means simply by the definition of what S is, n x is less than m.  at least element of S, M minus 1 is not in S. So that implies that M minus 1, not in x means, in S means M minus 1 is less than or equal to n
times x, i.e.  n is less than or equal to n times x plus 1. Now, we'll combine these two inequalities, along with the first
1 involving n times y minus x. So I'm just basically rewriting what I until your goal was here in this bracket,  is less than m, and this is less than or equal to n times x plus 1, which by our definition of n, and the first
inquality we have up there involving y is less than n times y. So we have n x is less than m, is less than n y, so that means x is less than m over n is less than y.  n, which is a proportion of natural numbers, is our choice, that's an awkward way to
finish the sentence, but my mind went blank.  So one small thing that I, just a very minor comment if you've got all this and you understand it that's fine, but you may be asking, since I never actually
seated out loud, where did I use the fact that x is bigger than or equal to 0?  So, so where I used that,  So let's just assume x is bigger than 0. So where did I use is really right in this place here? So I don't want to spend too much time on that, but by being able to claim that n minus
1 is not an S.  OK, so what about kc? So kc will just reduce to kb.  y which is less than or equal to 0, then 0 is bigger than or equal to minus
y, which is bigger than minus x. So by kb, there exists a rational number, R tilde, such that minus y  y is less than R tilde is less than minus x. Then this implies that x is less than minus R tilde is less than y, so R equal to minus R tilde  does the job, so that proves the theorem. So we'll use this in just a minute to prove a simple statement about  go on, and what I'd like to do is state a different way to verify that a number is a sup of a set or the inf of a set. So I'm just going to state it for sup's, and there's an analogous
statement for infs, so the theorem is this,  and this will actually be on the assignment. So, S is a subset of R, this is an empty and bounded above. So S has a supremum. So I'm going to tell you what the supremum
statusifies, and it's an if and only of statement,  some number x equals a sup of S if and only if, so either I'll do a double arrow or write if and only if I f, 2 conditions are satisfy, the first is that x is an upper bound for S.  in the second, so at one point, in the very near future, we're going to be
seeing epsilon's and delta's, so I'll state it this way, so you should start seeing them now, for every epsilon positive, there exists an element y in S such that x minus epsilon is less than or equal to x  So why is this, why should this be the case? Well, if S is all over here to the left of x, then if I take something smaller, so I'm actually giving you a picture proof of
one direction, and so if I take something smaller x minus epsilon, then this cannot be an upper bound  for S, so therefore, there must exist some y in S bigger than x minus epsilon, and it's less than or equal to x
because x is an upper bound for S. So in fact, this picture is a proof of this direction, namely if x is the supremum of S, then these two conditions are satisfied, and then on the assignment, I'll have you prove the other direction, basically, that these two conditions imply that a real number  is the supremum of S. So let's use this theorem, an Archimedean property to prove a simple statement about the
sub of a simple set.  it as a theorem, but this is a remark, meaning I'm being a little bit loose with what I'm
writing down, but it's true, x equals inf of S, so for S, a non-empty subset, which is bounded below, an analogous characterization as x is a lower bound for S, and for all epsilon positive,  to y in S so that x is less than or equal to y is less than x plus epsilon. So this is the analogous statement for the inf for something to be the M. So this is a, I guess you could call it a theorem, is not a very
specacular theorem, but if I look at the set 1 minus 1 over n,  in a natural number, and I take it sup, this is equal to 1. So this shouldn't surprise you too much because what is this set?  equal to everything in here, so it's certainly an upper bound, and everything is
progressively getting closer to 1, so it should satisfy the second property, namely, if I go a little bit to the left of 1, then I'll be able to find something less than or equal to 1 and bigger than that thing to the left of 1.  since 1 minus 1 over n is less than 1, for all natural numbers n, this implies 1 is an upper bound for this set. Now, we're going to verify that 1 satisfies that second
property of the theorem  that for every epsilon positive, I can find a natural number little n so that 1 minus 1 over n is bigger than 1
1 minus epsilon. And we use the Archimedean property for that.  every proof should start off with, let epsilon be positive. In fact, I'll give you a couple of points on the exam if there's
epsilon delta M's, whatever proofs, which means you should prove something for all epsilon. I'll give you a couple of points on the exam if you just at least state, let epsilon be positive.  So then there exists, so by the Archimedean property, there exists a natural number n such that 1 over epsilon is less than n.  it's taking x to be 1 and y to be 1 over epsilon.  So since epsilon is less than 1 over epsilon is less than n, this is equivalent to saying 1 over n is less than epsilon. And therefore, minus epsilon is less than minus 1 over n. So then 1 minus epsilon is less than 1 minus 1 over n, which is, as we have a
appears less than 1.  to the natural number n so that so that so that so that that went kind of quick. So what I did was I found a natural number n, which is bigger than 1 over epsilon. And from now on typically, I won't state it like this, I'll state it more like this, which this
follows from this.  So when I make a statement, choose a natural number so that 1 over n is less than
epsilon, that follows from the Archimedean property just by taking 1 over this inequality.  by the theorem, 1 is equal to the
supremum of this set. So let's get a little more familiarity with using this, using sups and infs and in particular, using that  which I stated right there about this characterization of the sup as being an upper bound and
satisfying the second property that for every epsilon positive, you can find something in the set which is bigger than x minus epsilon.  and a, a subset, we define two sets x plus a, this is just the shift of a by x. So this is a set of all elements of the form x plus little a, for little a's and capital A, and x times a, this is a set of all elements of the form x times a,  for a is in capital A. So from now on, basically towards the n
until almost the end of the course, we're working as in subset to the real numbers. So these things are meaningful plus in multiplication.  is a real number, and a is bounded above, and the conclusion is x plus a is bounded above, and the supremum of this set x plus a is equal to x plus the supremum of a.  of guess this because let's assume a is this interval here, that would make the right end point of this interval, then when I shift everything by x, then this point, sup a,  So this is not too surprising. There are surprising theorems and
analysis we already saw, one, at least I thought it was surprising, hopefully you found it surprising, about the cardinality of the power set compared to the cardinality of the original set, you come up with this  which in the end, basically, referenced itself in its definition, which led to the conclusion we wanted, but this one is not so scary, this one you should be able, this theorem you should be able to believe, and maybe even
proved without me telling you how to, if not, that's fine too, the other statement is that if x is positive,  and a is bounded above, then x plus a, or x times a, sorry, is bounded above, and sup of x times a equals x times a  And again, so if I were to draw a picture, and let's say a is symmetric with respect to 0, so there's a, there's a, there's a sup of a, and I multiply it by x, then this either fattens the interval or makes it smaller, so let's say I made it smaller,  then x times sup of a would be the supremum of this set, yx positive, the reason is because if I multiply by x
negative, this not only shrinks it, but it flips things. So in fact, there's a statement in the book about if x is negative, then here you would need to assume a is bounded below, so this corresponding
sponding statement for x-negative is if x is less than 0  and a is bounded below, then x times a is bounded above, because
multiplying by something negative, flips inequalities, and the sup of x times a is equal to minus x times the inf of a, or there's no minus, it should be sup of x times a is equal to x times the inf of a.  So let's prove these two theorems using this previous theorem that I stated without proof, but you'll prove in the assignment about how to characterize
sub-subsets as upper bounds and satisfying this absolute property.  So let me just restate our assumptions, so suppose x is all x is in R, and a is bounded above.  because R has the least upper bound property, a is a non-empty subset. So I should have said that, so all of this is for a non-empty subset of a, so that I'm talking about something. So I have a non-empty subset, which is bounded above by the
least upper bound property, the supremum of a exists in R.  the sup of a satisfies, it's an upper bound for x times a, then for all l a and a, since sup a is an upper
bound for capital A, little a is less than or equal to sup a, which implies that for all a and capital A, if I multiply through by x, I mean, if I add x to both sides,  x plus, little a is less than or equal to x plus sup of a, which implies that x plus sup of a is an upper bound for the set x plus a.  this epsilon property, let epsilon be positive, then by the previous theorem, there exists a y in a such that sup minus a is less than epsilon, is less than
y is less than or equal to sup a.  this is just from the fact that the supremum of a satisfy is those two
conditions up there. Now, I just add x through all of these inequalities, implies there exists a y, and a such that x plus sup a minus epsilon is less than x plus y,  which is less than or equal to x plus sup of a. And that proves the second property, because what have I done? I found for every epsilon positive an element of the set x plus a, so I'll even restate this, which implies there exists an element
z in the set x plus capital A, namely x plus y,  so that x plus sup a minus epsilon is less than g is less than or equal to x plus sup a. And that's the second property which we wanted to prove this
epsilon property.  Now, we've proven it for x plus sup a for the set x plus a. Thus, sup of x plus a equals x plus a equals x plus sup a. So we proved that x plus sup a is the supremum of x plus a by showing it was an upper bound,  this epsilon property, I mean, it's essentially the same proof for x times
times capital A, you just replace  pluses with multiplication. So in fact, I'm running a little short on time, I guess a little slow moving today, so I will not go through, and
actually write the proof of the second part, simply  because the same logic works only now, I replace everything by
application by x instead of dition by x, well, almost.  times a, so to suppose x is positive, an a is bounded above, then sup a, again,
exists an R, because a is bounded above, and because sup a is an upper bound for capital A,  in capital A is less than or equal to sup A, which implies that for all A in capital A, x times little a is less than or equal to x times sup A, which implies that x times sup A is an upper bound  for x times a. So we've proven that x times sup a is an upper bound for the set x times a, we now want to verify
this epsilon property for x times sup a with respect to that set x times a. So let epsilon be positive, and I'm going to put in brackets, again, what we want to do, what we want to define,  there exists a z in x times a so that x times x times sup a minus epsilon is less than c. c is always less than or equal to x times sup a, since we've proven x times
times sup a is an upper bound for this set, so I'm not going to keep writing the second inequality.  want to prove, we haven't proven it yet, so let epsilon be positive, then just as we did in the plus
case, then there exists an element y in a such that sup a minus now here, we're going to choose y not exactly for epsilon here. Remember, the statement for number 2 holds for sup a for every epsilon  particular, I can choose anything I want here and find a y in between sup a minus whatever I want here, which is positive, and sup a. So instead of putting epsilon here, like I did before, I'm going to put epsilon over x, which I can do because x is positive, which means
epsilon over x is some positive number.  Now, why did I choose epsilon over x? Because magic happens, then that means there exists a y in a, such that if I multiply through by x, I get x times sup a minus epsilon is less than x times y, so I'm going to stop
writing this inequality because this is always true,  because x times sup a is bigger than or equal to x times y, which implies there exists a z
in x times a, namely, z equals x times y, where y is from here, such that x times sup a minus epsilon is less than z.  satisfies the second epsilon property with respect to S
given by x times a, and that's the n. So you see that I wanted this in the end, so I chose y to give me this slightly different thing for epsilon over x, because in the n,  multiply through by x, and I wanted this. When we do proofs for limits, you'll see we're always trying to make something less than epsilon. So quite often, we'll have to choose something to be less than epsilon over 5 or epsilon over
some number for everything to work out in the end, just like we did here. So that's a preview of things to come.  And one last, in the simple theorem about sup and infs, this really doesn't
have that theorem, but just basically what the definition of sup and infs are, namely that if a and b are a subset of R, and for all, let's say,  with a, bounded above, b, bounded below, and for all xy, for all xn, a, and for all y, and b,  is less than or equal to y, then sup of a is less than or equal to the inf of b. So picture y is, here's a, everything here sits below everything in b. So b has to be over here. And therefore, the sup of a, which is there, has to be less than or equal to the inf  of b, which is there, that's the picture that goes along with this. But how do we actually prove this? I mean, we have to use the definition, the
definitions, pictures do not suffice, although the informants they don't suffice. So this is quite simple, so I'm not going to rewrite the hypotheses now because I take a little bit.  So if, for all x, and let me, basically, what we're going to do is
going to take a sup and then an inf, so that y, b and b, then for all x  in a, x is less than or equal to y, which implies y is an upper bound for a. And therefore, the supremum of a, which is the least upper bound, has to be smaller than or equal to y,  to be proven for all y and b, sup a is less than or equal to y, which
implies that sup a is a lower bound for b. And by that same logic of a minute ago, so remember, the infimum of b is the greatest lower bound.  So I take any lower bound of b, it has to be less than or equal to the inf of b, which
implies sup a is less than or equal to inf b.  OK, so we're starting to close out here our discussion of the elementary properties of the real numbers, so let me say just a couple of things about the
absolute value  And let me recall how this is defined, at least this is how it should have been
defined in your calculus class, if x is in R, we define the absolute value of x, this is either x, if x is bigger than or equal to 0 or minus x, x is less than  equal to 0, note that these two things agree when x is 0 so that I'm not
defining the absolute value of x to be two different things when x equals 0.  or it's supposed to represent, I shouldn't say, is the distance because I haven't told you what a distance means, but what is it supposed to represent?  this distance is meant to be absolute value of x, so that y. So in fact, that's the first thing that I'm just going to prove some very simple properties of the absolute value.  that's a tough word to say, familiar
arroties, or familiar-arrotty with proofs, so I'm going to do as many proofs as I can for you. So the first statement is, for all x in R, absolute value of x is bigger than 0, bigger than or equal to 0, and the absolute value equals 0 if and only if x equals 0.  second property is that for all x in R, the absolute value of x equals the
absolute value of minus x for all x, y in R, if I take the absolute value of the product, this is equal to the product  for all x and R, the absolute value of x squared equals
absolute value of x squared, the fifth property is if x and y is in R, then x is less than or equal to y  if and only if minus y is less than or equal to x is less than or equal to y. And the sixth property that we'll prove is that for all x in R, x is less than or equal to its absolute value.  surprising, but we'll go through the proofs, because that's the point of this class. Later on in life, you'll come across some more interesting theorems than
definitely this one. So if we're going to prove this first statement that if x is in R, the absolute value of x is bigger than or equal to 0.  x is bigger than or equal to 0, then the absolute value of x is by definition equal to x, which is
bigger than or equal to 0. If x is less than or equal to 0, then the absolute minus x is bigger than or equal to 0. And by the definition of the absolute value of x is equal  which is bigger than or equal to 0. So that's proven that the absolute value of x is
always bigger than or equal to 0. So now let's prove this statement, absolute value of x equals 0 if and only if x equals 0. So when you see an if and only if or two arrows here, that means there's two statements you need to prove that this implies this, and this implies this.  this direction, usually in if and only if there's an
easy direction, if x equals 0, then this is clear simply from the definition, then absolute value of x equals x equals x equals 0.  equals 0, and if x is bigger than or equal to 0, we get that x is equal to its
absolute value of x is equal to 0. If x is less than or equal to 0, then minus x is equal to its absolute value of x, which equals 0, or x equals 0.  assuming the absolute value of x is 0, we've proven that x equals 0 in both cases.  So, I'm going to
take a few things,  OK, so now we're on to proving number 2.  non-positive, so the x is bigger than or equal to 0, then minus x is less than or equal to 0, which implies that the absolute
value of minus x equals minus x, which equals x, which equals the absolute value of x, since we're in the case that x is not negative.  if x is less than or equal to 0, and minus x is bigger than or equal to 0, which implies that the absolute
value of minus x is equal to minus x, which is, since x is less than or equal to 0, and by the definition of the absolute value equal to absolute value  OK, so for all x, y, real number, the absolute value of x times y is equal to the
absolute value of x times absolute value of y, so we need to consider two cases. One of them is both of them are non-negative, both of them are non-positive, and both of them are, or one of them is positive, one of them is non-negative,  is non-negative, one of them is non-positive. So if x is bigger than or equal to 0, and y is bigger than
or equal to 0, then x times y is bigger than or equal to 0, which implies x, the absolute value of x times y is equal to x times y, and since x is non-negative, that's equal to its absolute value, since y is non-negative, that's equal to its absolute value,  if x is bigger than or equal to 0, y is less than or equal to 0, then minus x times y is bigger than or equal to 0, which implies that the absolute value of x
times y is equal to, so I should say,  try this way, this is equal to minus x, y, which is equal to x times minus y, and since y is negative, minus y is equal to its absolute value, and since x is non-negative, x is equal to its absolute value, so this is equal to that.  Now, the case that, so you not be thinking about what about x
negative and y, non-negative, so y bigger than or equal to 0, x less than or equal to 0, it's the same proof, just exchange x and y, so I'm not going to do that case.  less than or equal to 0, y is less than or equal to 0, then this implies that minus x is bigger than or equal to 0, and minus y is bigger than or equal to 0, which by this first case, which we've proven, now apply it to minus x and minus y, I get that the absolute value of minus x times minus y, which is equal to x times y,  minus x times minus y is equal to x times y, this is equal to the absolute
value of minus x times the absolute value of minus y, and by number 2, which we've already proven, which is at the absolute value of minus a number is equal to the absolute value of the number, again, we get that.  of 3, take y equals x, and 3. Now, for number 5, it's an if and only if so we need to prove two directions, namely we'll assume this, and then prove this, and then
assume this, and then prove that.  is this direction, meaning suppose our assumption's going to be
suppose the absolute value of x is less than or equal to y. So then x is bigger than or equal to 0, then this means that if the absolute value of x is less than or equal to y, that automatically tells you y is non-negative.  to 0, which is less than or equal to x, which equals the absolute
value of x, which is less than or equal to y, i.e., minus y is less than or equal to x, is less than or equal to y. So in the other case, that x is less than or equal to 0, I can apply basically this part, which I've already proven,  minus x is bigger than or equal to 0, and the absolute value of minus x, which is equal to the
absolute value of x is less than or equal to y, which implies by this first case I've proven, apply it now to minus x here, that minus y is less than or equal to minus x is less than or equal to y, and multiplying through by minus 1, flips all the inequalities  and also flips the sign, which basically means it means it
leaves this inequality unchanged if I replace this by x. Multiply through by minus 1, flips the inequalities and proves what we want to do.  So we've proven that this inequality, the absolute value of x less than or
or equal to y implies that this. So now we need to prove the converse direction, so the converse direction,  OK, so suppose minus y is less than or equal to x is less than or equal to y. Now, I want to prove the absolute value of x is less than or equal to y.  if x is bigger than or equal to 0, then the absolute value of x is equal to x, which by this
inequality is less than or equal to y. If x is less than or equal to 0, then minus y is less than or equal to x implies that minus x is less than or equal to y, and because x is negative,  x is equal to its absolute value, and therefore, we prove in the absolute
value of x is less than or equal to y. So we've proven number 5 and number 6, so for number 6, what do we do?  and 5 to conclude that x is less than or equal to the absolute value of x, and bigger than or equal to
minus the absolute value of x, and that's the proof. Now, I'm going to prove one last theorem  So this one is actually very important about the absolute value, is
probably, so this inequality is one of the most important tools in all of analysis, and you get to see it right here in your first analysis class, there's two, basically two other things we'll prove at one point, which I don't know,  are the two other most important things in analysis. This is the triangle inequality, and the other two are
integration by parts and change of variables. So the three things fuel the analysis machine.  and it states for all x, y in R, the absolute value of x plus y is less than or equal to the
absolute value of x plus the absolute value of y. Why is it called a triangle inequality? Well, let's try to think, so although x and y are elements of the real number line, let's instead try and think of these as two vectors  instead. So here's the vector x, and then let's say, I'm running out of time, so I think we'll stop here.  So, I'm going to
take a few things, and I'm going to