 OK, so let's continue our study of sequences of real numbers.  this lecture, we looked at sequences obtained from sequences, namely the sequences that give
you the limsup and liminf and we showed that these are actually limits of subsequences, now I'm going to define what looks like a new class of sequences, but we'll see it's actually not, these are called Cauchy sequences,  Cauchy, not Cauchy, not Cauchy, Cauchy, Cauchy, so French guy, so it's pronounced Cauchy, and probably not even pronounced like that, is probably a
get a different pronunciation by people who actually speak French. So what is the definition of a Cauchy sequence?  is, intuitively, it's a sequence so that if you go far enough out in the sequence, any two entries in that
sequence are close together. So convergent sequences had the property that if you go far enough out, the entries in the sequence are getting close to a real number, Cauchy sequence is that any two entries are close to each other.  So we say a sequence is Cauchy if for all epsilon positive, there exists an M, a natural number, such that if n is bigger than or
or equal to M and k is bigger than  and equal to M, then xn minus xk is less than epsilon. So maybe not, let me not write if, I mean, it's the same statement, but since it looks a little more like previous
statements, let me put it for all there.  it's a definition of a new thing, you should now try to look at an example and then
possibly negate the definition to see if you really understand it. So an example of a Cauchy sequence is x sub n equals 1 over n, our favorite sequence, so let's prove this, so all we have is the definition, so we have to verify that x sub n equals 1 over n
verifies the definition  be in Cauchy. So just like when we try to prove something is
convergent, which is a for-all epsilon statement, the first thing you have to do is let epsilon be positive, and then I have to choose M and show that that capital M produces this statement here.  as capital M being bigger than 2 over epsilon, but I'm going to
phrase it this way. Now, we have to show that it works, namely if I take n bigger than or equal to capital M and k bigger than or equal to capital M, then this difference is less than epsilon.  equal to by the triangle inequality, the absolute value of each of these added together, which is just 1 over n plus 1 over k. And since these are
bought bigger than or equal to M, each one is less than or equal to 1 over M, 1 over M, so I get 2 over M, which by our choice of M is less than epsilon. So x sub n equals 1 over n is an example of a Cauchy sequence.  So let's negate the definition, and then we'll obtain a look at an example of a sequence which is not Cauchy, and as you'll probably guess, if this is our favorite
sequence which converges, our favorite sequence which doesn't converge, we'll be an example of a sequence which is not Cauchy. And this shouldn't come as a surprise, because, again, a sequence which is Cauchy, if you  you go far enough out, any two entries are close to each other. But if we look at, for example, the sequence minus 1 to the n, which is just
minus 1 plus 1 minus 1, minus 1, any two entries will differ by, or you can always choose two entries that differ by 2 in distance.  get what it means for something not to be Cauchy, so I'll write all that out, x sub n is not Cauchy if, so every time we see a for all, it becomes there exists, if there exists a bad, epsilon not positive
such that  for all M, a natural number, you can find two entries further out than M that are greater than
epsilon 0 distance to each other. So there exists n bigger than or equal to M and k bigger than or equal to M, such that x sub n minus x sub k is bigger than or equal to this  So again, the definition of Cauchy means that, as long as I go far enough out in the
sequence, this distance is supposed to be less than epsilon. So for all epsilon positive, there exists a capital M so that I have this picture, if I choose x sub k plus 1, then it should also be within distance epsilon to x sub n or x sub k.  closer and closer together, the negation means that they're not getting closer and closer together
to each other. So there exists some small distance so that you can always go as far out as you want and find two entries that are greater than epsilon, not distance to each other. So what's an example of that?  is not Cauchy.  there should exist some bad epsilon 0 so I can go far enough out, so I can go as far out as I want and find two entries in the sequence
differing from each other by epsilon 0 in distance. So basically, any two entries other than I can always find two entries in the sequence which differ from each other by 2, so that'll be my bad epsilon 0.  choose epsilon not equals 2, let M be a natural number. So now we have to find an element of this
entries in the sequence further out than M, whose distance to each other is bigger than or equal to 2, we can just take M plus 1 and capital M, choose n equals M, and k equals M plus 1.  are both bigger than or equal to M, then minus 1 to the n minus 1 to the k, this is equal to 1 minus 1 minus 1 after I factor out a minus 1 to the capital M, which equals 2.  So at the beginning said that this will look like a definition of a new
type of sequence, but it's not really. So as it turns out, so the elements of the sequence are getting closer and closer together  as you go far enough out. So they're all kind of clustering near each other, which makes you think they're all cluster near something in the
real number line, and therefore maybe this sequence is convergent. Now, this is true, and we'll prove this is that a sequence is Cauchy if and only if it's convergent. Now, this is true only for the real numbers, and I'll say a little bit about this in a minute,  true for the real numbers, but it's not true for the rational numbers, and I'll get to that in just a second. So what we're going to prove is that a
sequence is Cauchy if and only if it is convergent. So the first thing I want to show is that Cauchy sequences are bounded.  So the proof of this statement is essentially the same as the proof that
convergent sequences are bounded, so let me draw a picture that goes along with this proof. So as long as I go far enough out, there exists an M so that for all n bigger than or equal to capital M, I can say this,  let's look at this entry x sub m, then for all n bigger than or equal to capital M, all of the other entries
have to be within a certain distance to x sub n, based on the definition of Cauchy. So let's say I make that distance 1, and let's say 0's over here, just for this picture. So then for all n bigger than or equal to x sub n, for all n bigger than or equal to capital M, x sub n  in this interval here. And therefore, we'll get that x sub n is bounded. So the way this picture looks, I'm going to write it this way, plus 1 plus 1. Now, that handles all n bigger than or equal to capital M, so we just need to deal with the first
capital M minus 1, other guys.  So maybe there's capital M minus 1 is over here, capital x sub 1 is over there, capital x sub 2 is over here, so then our bound will just be this one, which handles all of the n bigger than
or equal to M plus the absolute values of these guys that we missed.  since xn is Cauchy, there exists an M, a natural number, such that for all n bigger than or
or equal to M, k bigger than or equal to M, x sub n minus x sub k is less than 1 in distance. So this is certainly true for k equals k  capital M, so this implies for all n bigger than or equal to M, x sub n minus x sub
x sub capital M is less than 1. So now, if I use the triangle inequality, I can show that the previous implies that for all n bigger than or equal to M, if I look at the absolute value of x sub n, this is equal to x sub n minus x sub capital M plus  m, and this is less than or equal to the absolute value of this guy, plus the
absolute value of this guy, and this is bounded by 1. So in summary, I've shown that for all n bigger than or equal to this fixed integer capital M, x sub n is less than or equal  x, the capital M in absolute value, plus 1. So that's for all a little n bigger than or
or equal to capital M, so now I just need to pick a big enough number that bounds the first capital M entries that are not covered by this inequality.  b be the absolute value of x sub 1 plus
absolute value of x sub 2 plus this fixed number now, then for all n bigger than or equal to capital M, I have by this inequality up here, this is a sum of non-negative  negative number, so this number is certainly bigger than or
or equal to just this part, and if I have n bigger than equal to 1 and less than m, then x sub n, which is going to be the absolute value of this guy is going to be one of these that appears here, which is certainly less than or equal to if I  add on this number and the other, which is less than or equal to b. So now I've found a b, which is non-negative, which
bounds all the absolute values, and therefore, this proves that the sequence is bounded.  And so what I'm now going to show is the following. So again, all of the entries are getting close to each other, they're kind of cluster near each other. So it kind of feels like they want to converge. And this next theorem says that, well, if you've identified a limit along a
subsequence,  in fact, the entire sequence converges. So of course, this is not true for an arbitrary sequence, if a
subsequence converges, or should say, for an arbitrary sequence, it's not true that a subsequence converging implies a full sequence converging, we have minus 1 to the n for which a subsequence converges, but the whole sequence does not converge.  if and only if that subsequence converges. So the statement of the theorem is
following, if x sub n is Cauchy and there exists a subsequence,  which is converging to some number, call it x, then the sequence, full sequence, converges to x. So if I have, so if I, what I was saying right before, I stated this theorem, is that if I
highed this part and just say there exists a subsequence which is converging  to x, this does not imply that the full sequence converges to x, because we have this
example of minus 1 to the n, but if I also assume the sequence is Cauchy, then it does follow that Cauchy plus subsequence converging implies the full sequence converges.  And we're going to do this just by using the definition by verifying this through the definition, not using the squeeze theorem or anything like that.  xn is Cauchy, there exists M0, natural number, such that for all n bigger than or equal to M0, and k bigger than or equal to M0, x sub n minus x  is less than epsilon over 2, why this epsilon over 2? Well, why should you not be surprised? Well, we have two assumptions here, like we did when we did convergence of
products of sequences and so on, which had two assumptions, namely two sequences converged to something, typically that means we'll have two integers coming, we'll choose a bigger integer, and then some inequalities to get an epsilon.  that's a little bit of a rambling answer to why we get an epsilon over 2 here, or
why we put one there, since the subsequence, so I didn't this subsequence converges to x, there exists another  integer, M sub 1 such that if k is bigger than or equal to M sub 1, then x sub n sub k minus x is less than epsilon over 2. So maybe I should have used a
different letter here, let's use a little M, so I don't want you to think these have to be the same k  OK? So now we'll choose an integer bigger than
bigger than both M1 and M2 and show that it works, choose M to be M0 plus M1,  And now we need to show this works, and if n is bigger than or equal to M, so let me actually make a first observation before I go  n bigger than or equal to capital M. Then simply because we, and since n sub k is bigger than or
or equal to k for all k, a natural number, just because the n sub k's there, an increasing sequence of integers, which starts at least at 1, then since n sub k is bigger than or equal to k for all k, this implies that the integer  here, n sub capital M is bigger than or equal to M, which remember is M0 plus M1, which implies that n sub M is bigger than or
equal to M0, and n sub M is bigger than or equal to M1. So I just wanted to make that this preliminary observation, and now we'll go to showing that this  So now, if n is bigger than or equal to capital M, I look at x sub n minus x in absolute value and
add and subtract x sub M capital M, capital M minus x, and use the triangle inequality  then, so since n is bigger than or equal to capital M, which is bigger than or equal to M0, that means n is bigger than or equal to M0, and then n sub M we just showed is bigger than or equal to M0. So by this inequality, I get that the first term is less than epsilon over 2, and now n sub M,  M is certainly bigger than or equal to M sub 1, and therefore, I will get that this part is less than
epsilon over 2 because of this inequality.  We'll prove the following that a sequence is convergent if and
only if it's Cauchy.  So this is a two-way street, so we need to show the left implies the right, and then the right implies the left.  based on what we've done, I shouldn't say it's easy, but what we've done so far, it
quickly follows. So we're assuming x sub n is Cauchy, and trying to show it's convergent, then so if x sub n is Cauchy, this implies that x sub n is bounded,  which implies by the Bolzano-Weierstrass theorem, that x sub n has a convergent subsequence, and by the theorem we just proved, if a Cauchy sequence has a
convergent subsequence, it must be convergent.  Now, for the converse direction, that xn is convergent,
implies xn is Cauchy. So this should not come as a surprise, let me draw a picture.  then since the x n's are converging to x, if I draw a little
interval around x of the total length epsilon, so x minus epsilon over 2, and x plus epsilon over 2, then I will find, as long as, so then there exists M, so that for all n bigger than or equal to capital M,  of the x sub n's lie in this interval, yeah? They all lie in this interval because they have to be within distance epsilon over 2 to x, if the x n's are converging to x. And since they lie in this interval, the distance between any two of them can only be as big as the
the length of the interval, which is epsilon,  So this is essentially the picture of y, a convergent
sequence has to be Cauchy, so now let's turn this picture into math, we have to verify that we have to verify xn is Cauchy through the definition, that's all we have. So let epsilon be positive, since the xn's converge to x, there exists an integer M sub 0, a natural number, such that for all n  bigger than or equal to M sub 0, x sub n minus x is less than
epsilon over 2. And so we'll choose the M for our definition of Cauchy to be this M sub 0. And if n is bigger than or equal to M, and k is bigger than or equal to M,  at the absolute value of x sub n minus x sub k, and add and subtract x, and use the triangle inequality, this is less than or equal to x
of n minus x in absolute value plus x minus x sub k. Each of these is less than epsilon over 2, since n is bigger than or equal to capital M, and k is bigger than or equal to capital M, so this is less than epsilon over 2, plus epsilon over 2,  equals epsilon, and therefore, xn is Cauchy. Now, I want to make a brief remark about
theorem. So remember how this whole story started off, there was something wrong with the rational numbers  namely, they didn't contain the square root of 2, so we couldn't solve the algebraic
equation x squared minus 2 equals 0, but this also then turned into the rationals not being complete in the sense of order, not every set, non-empty bounded set, has a supremum, it didn't have the least upper bound property.  as somehow saying that the rationals are incomplete in this sense. So hopefully at the end of this class, we'll be able to get to metric spaces.  if this sequence is, the rational numbers, meaning sequences are only sequences of rational numbers, limits are only elements of the
rational numbers, epsilon is only a rational number and so on,  then we still have many of the same theorems that we proved, not all of them, and I'll indicate which ones don't hold, but if we only work in
rationals, then we always do have convergence implies Cauchy, meaning convergent sequences are Cauchy.  Cauchy sequences are not necessarily convergent. Again, what's the example here?  And now viewed in the universe of real numbers, x sub n's converge to root 2.  of rational numbers, it would converge to the square root of 2, which is not a
rational number. So because the square root of 2 is not a rational number, this shows that the rational numbers do not have this completeness property that Cauchy sequences converge.  Cauchy is equivalent to convergent, these are called
complete metric spaces, and then if you add a little more structure, they're called monotonex spaces and so on, which are very important, not just in math, but also for formulating rigorously, a lot of the underlying assumptions for mathematical physics,  So if we're just looking inside the rationals, it does not follow that Cauchy sequences
always converge, and now let's just stop for a minute and take stock of why this was true for the real numbers, what did we use going back?  We use the fact that the limsup and the liminf always exists, and first off, they're defined to be sup and infs, which may not always
exists as rational numbers as we've already shown, so that's definitely a problem already there. But even more so, when we proved that every bounded monotone sequence converges, what we showed was that this limit is  a sup of a certain set or an inf of a certain set, which, again, may or may not exist if we're just looking in the rational numbers, because the rational
numbers do not have the least upper bound property. So it really is the least upper bound property that gives us convergence equivalent to Cauchy for the real numbers.  is, I mean, it has to be because that's the main thing that separates the two fields, so I'm just reiterating this here, is the reason why convergent is equivalent to Cauchy.  Now that I've proved that Cauchy is equivalent to convergence, maybe you'll ask, then why do we introduce it at all? If these two notions are the same, why even introduce them if they're just
convergent sequences already? And the reason is because  to show that a sequence converges, you have to somehow have your hands on a candidate for the limit. If you want to prove that xn converges, you have to somehow come up with an x that it converges to, and it's not always clear how to find that x.  numbers, doesn't require you to find a candidate for convergence. All it requires you to do is show that, as long as you go far enough out, any two entries in the sequence are close together without
requiring you to come up with a limit. Computing limits is quite difficult. We're about to do series, and there's maybe like, maybe like, 5 series,  what you do know that there's a ton of other series that are actually convergent, even though you don't know what the limit is. And why do you know that this is exactly because, and why people thought of Cauchy sequences to begin with, a lot of analysis, so to
summarize this, convergent sequences are nice, but in practice, it's difficult to get your hands on what could be a limit of a
sequence, especially if that sequence is pretty  complicated. So if you're trying to show a certain sequence
converges, it suffices by what we've done here to show that it's Cauchy, and that's a little bit easier to do because that just requires you to work with the original sequence.  So, OK, so that's what we're going to move on to is series now, which, as I said a minute ago, is a
original reason why people started developing the foundations of analysis, what we're talking about right now to begin with,  doing very formal things that ended up not making sense, trying to add up, they were adding infinitely many positive
number and coming up with a negative number, that can't be right. So all of this was created, discovered, however, you want to phrase it, to put on rigorous foundations, this next topic, which  So, and you dealt with series, in calculus, you know what a series is, maybe you don't remember all the proofs of the
properties of series, but it suffices to say this is a pretty good motivation since it's one of the most useful things that comes out of math.  So of ODEs, PDEs, Taylor expansions, all these things are in some sense a form of series, so being able to justify them as being real things is a necessity.  n, the symbol, or maybe I'll just sometimes write just sum x sub n, is what's called the series
associated to the sequence  x sub n. So right now, that's just a symbol. We're going to interpret this as a real number in the
following situation.  the following sequence, given by S sub m equals, so this is the element of the sequence, and what is it, it is the actual sum,  this is not a formal thing, this is just a finite sum from n equals 1 to M. So this is, so this sequence now, M equals 1 to infinity, and these guys we call partial sums,  converges. So right now, if we just have a sequence x sub n, this series
is just a simple, we say that this series converges if this sequence of partial sums converge,  S is this limit, and we write S is equal to the series, and treat the series now as a number.  So in general, if I have a sequence, I just have this formal symbol, which I'm writing down, which I call a series
associated to it in the case that this sequence of partial sums converges, then I actually identify this series with a real number and treat it as a real number.  So when I've written this, the series is starting at 1, but it doesn't
necessarily have to, just by shifting the index, so let me just say here that we don't necessarily have to start  series at n equals 1. So this could be sum from n equals 0 to infinity, in which case, we have a sequence
starting now at x sub 0, or this could be starting at 2, in which place the sequence of x sub n starts at n equals 2, and then the sequence of partial sums would start at not m equals 1, but m equals 0 or m equals 2, depending on where the series starts.  OK, so some examples, the series sum from n equals 1 to infinity 1 over n
n plus 1 times n, this is a convergent series. So let's look at the proof.  look at the m-th partial sum, this is the sum from n equals 1 to m of 1 over n plus 1, n, and this is equal to, now if I write 1 over n plus 1 times n
n as 1 over n minus 1 over n plus 1, this is now the sum  1 over n plus these are finite sums, so I can always split them up, which should be a minus. And so now this is equal to 1 plus 1 plus 1 over m minus 1 1 1 1 plus 1
1, 1 over m plus 1 over m plus 1 over m plus 1 plus 1  And you see all of these cancel, and all that's left is 1 minus 1 over m plus 1. So the inf partial sum is equal to 1 minus 1 over m plus 1, and therefore, the sequence of partial sums is the limit as m goes to infinity of this, which is just 1.  Now, our favorite sequence, which does not converge, we'll give us a series, which does not converge. So let's look at sum from n equals 1 to infinity, minus 1 to the n, this does not converge.  to prove the inf partial sum, this is equal to minus 1 plus 1 plus 1 plus minus 1 up until I get minus 1 to the m. And therefore, this is always equal to 1 of 2 things.  of these guys, and therefore, the minuses and pluses cancel just
leaving a minus 1 in the end, this last one, the odd one, and M is odd, and 0, if M is even, if I've add up an even number of these terms, then all of the minus 1's and 1's and 1's cancel out,  And therefore, this sequence, which is just minus 1 for M0 for M even, does not converge. And therefore, the series does not converge. So when I write this, this is just a symbol. This is just chalk on a chalk board.  So let's go to another series which does converge, and this is kind of the one to which we compare all other series, essentially, as you'll see, you have all these series test that you remember, hopefully,
hopefully from calculus that tells  maybe when a series converges, but maybe if you remember the proof or don't, how you do that is you converge it to one series
which you do know how to sum. So it was just by pure luck we were able to compute the sum or compute the explicit series for this guy, another one which we can do, therefore, is a geometric series.  then the series starting now at 0, R to the n converges and I can actually compute the sum of this series, and this is 1 over 1 minus R.  So let's look at the partial sums, and we can actually compute these as
well, just as we were able to do for the first example, we compute that the sum from n equals 0 to m of R to the m. Now, you can prove this by induction.  I believe I did, in the second lecture on induction, first or second
lector on induction, but if I add up some number raised to the n, so this should be to the n, nth power from 0 to m, this is equal to 1 minus R to the m plus 1 over 1 minus R. And I guess two lectures ago, we proved that if the absolute value,  let's say this now, in two lectures ago, we proved that if the absolute value of R is less than 1, then limit as let's make it m of R to the m equals 0,  which implies that, so this was the inf partial sum, which implies that the limit as m goes to infinity
of S sub m equals the limit as m goes to infinity of this thing, which is, if you like, so that plus 1 there just multiplies R to the m by R, and using the algebraic facts we proved  limits is 1 minus R times 0 over 1 minus R, which equals 1 over 1 minus R. So now you ask about R bigger than 1.  equals 1, then that's just summing up 1, and I leave it to you to check that that does not converge, that the sequence of partial sums, if I just sum up 1 from n
equals 0 to M is equal to n plus 1, which does not converge.  And let me make just a kind of silly comment, and maybe I didn't explicitly make this
comment about sequences, maybe I forgot to do that as well. So for a sequence, a sequence so you could start your sequence, not necessarily at the first entry, maybe you look at a, if you like, new sequence where  Well, so we know from sequences that subsequences of convergent
sequences converge, so if I, instead of looking at the whole sequence, start at, let's say, x100 and then go x101, x102, and that's the sequence I look at, well, that's a subsequence of the original one, which if it converges, implies that
subsequence converges.  obtaining this new sequence, all of that is to say that to understand if a sequence converges, I don't have to consider what
happens for the first, finitely many terms in the sequence, meaning a sequence x sub n converges if and only if a sequence starting now at, say, n equals 100, 101, 102, and so on,  And the same is true for a series that a series converges if and only if a series converges now starting at a
different point along the sequence.  and let capital M be a natural number, then n equals 1 to infinity of x sub n, this converges if and only if the sequence now starting at capital M converges, meaning when I have to decide whether  these converges or not, it doesn't matter what's going on for the first
finity of many terms, what matters is what's going on as I keep adding terms from further and further out of this sequence.  partial sum satisfy for all M, sum from n equals 1 to M, and now x sub n as sum from n equals capital M to M
x sub n plus sum from n equals  1 to capital M minus 1, x sub n. So this is now just a fixed number. So this is a sequence of partial sums corresponding to this series, this is a sequence of partial sums
corresponding to this series, and this is just a fixed number.  quick, so if this converges, then this converges to this minus this number, and if this converges, then this
sequence of partial sums converges to this limit plus this fixed number, and that's all I'm going to write.  the usefulness of Cauchy sequences, this is kind of where they really become useful.  a series I'm talking about, find the limit of partial sums, but because we have this
equivalence between Cauchy sequences and convergent sequences to decide if a series is convergent or not, we can just decide if, in some sense, it's Cauchy or not.  a series x sub n is Cauchy if the sequence of partial sums, again, these are, I'm just going to
to put an M of top because this may start at 0 or n equals 1 or something, so the sequence of partial sums  Cauchy. And so let me just restate what we proved for sequences in terms of series, so we proved that every Cauchy sequence is convergent. So a series is Cauchy if and only means that the sequence of partial sums is Cauchy, but we've proven that Cauchy sequences  convergent. So if this is Cauchy, then it's convergent and vice versa. So based on what we've proven already for
sequences, it follows that, and this just follows immediately from what we've proven already, so I'm not even going to write a proof, a series is Cauchy if and only if series is convergent.  in terms of the sequence of partial sums of partial sums associated to the series, and we've already proven the
equivalence between Cauchy and convergence for sequences. Now, let me write what it means to be Cauchy in a slightly  And it's the following. So before we had that a sequence is Cauchy intuitively if the elements of the sequence are getting close to each other. Now, for a series to be Cauchy, the intuitive way to think about it is that the tail of the
sup of the
sequence  sum is getting small, is getting arbitrarily small. Tail of the sum being if I add up, finitely many
numbers, far enough out. So a series is Cauchy if and only if for all epsilon positive, there exists a M, natural number, such that for all integers L bigger than  M, which is bigger than or equal to capital M, sum from n equals M plus 1 to L of x sub n. So this is some involving terms that are pretty far out, there are at least all indexed by something bigger than or equal to capital M is less than epsilon.  in smaller pieces, not individual pieces, but
actual like adding those up. So I'll leave it to you to do, they're both pretty easy, but this direction, I'll leave it to you as an exercise, and it'll follow immediately from what I'm going  for essentially this direction, so let's suppose, and let's make things concrete
starting somewhere, let's suppose this sum is Cauchy, and we want to prove now that it has this property.  positive, we now want to produce some capital number
M so that this holds. So since the sequence of partial sums S sub M is Cauchy, that's what it means for the series to be Cauchy, there exists a natural number, capital  M such that for all M bigger than or equal to M0, and L bigger than or equal to M0, S sub M minus S sub L is less than epsilon.  So we're actually going to take capital M to be this M0. Choose M to be M0, then if L is bigger than or equal to M0, bigger than or equal to M, which is equal to M, which is equal to M0, if I look at this sum  from n equals m plus 1 to L, x sub n, I can write this, so this is absolute value, so in fact, let me remove the absolute value so that this becomes pretty clear, I can write this sum as the L-th partial sum minus the
inf partial sum, because the L-th partial sum  sums from n equals 1 up to L, the mth partial sums from n equals 1
up to M, so the sum containing only the terms between M plus 1 and L is the difference of these guys. So now I'll put on absolute values, and this thing, because L and M are bigger than or equal to capital M, which is equal to M0, and because I have this inequality, this is less than epsilon.  essentially, essentially from this
equality here. So to check whether a series converges, I don't have to somehow come up with a limit for this series, some for this series, I can just show I can just prove that the tail can be made arbitrarily small, as long as I go far enough out in the series  And from this, we get a pretty simple elementary property, so theorem.  if a series converges, then this implies that the limit as n goes to infinity of x sub n of the sequence you used to obtain the series equals 0.  series being convergent if and only if it satisfies this
property here, which is somehow saying the tail of the sum is getting smaller and smaller, which means you can't be adding up big things as you go on out in the series.  So this by simple epsilon, delta or epsilon M definition, so suppose xn converges, then xn, the series is Cauchy, and now I'm going to verify  this using the epsilon M definition, let epsilon be positive, since xn is Cauchy, this implies that there exists a natural number M0 such that for all L bigger than or equal to M bigger than or equal to M
than or equal to M0, I have that condition there,  sum from n equals M plus 1 to L, x sub n is less than epsilon, choose M to be M0 plus 1.  plus 1, but not exactly, and not just because basically what I'm going to do is I'm going to take L to be equal to M plus 1, and the index gets shifted by 1.  limit as m goes to infinity, it's just a change in the
changed in the dummy variable. This is equal to sum from n equals m to m x sub n. And now, so I've shifted this, so now little m is bigger than or equal to capital M0 plus 1, so you could write this as if you like, M minus 1 plus 1, so little m minus 1  is bigger than or equal to M0. So by this inequality, this is less than epsilon.  terms, x sub n must converge to 0. So there's another reason why this series minus 1 to the n
does not converge, because those terms do not converge. And this also tells us that for this geometric series, when R is greater than or equal to 1 in absolute value,  does not converge. And the proof is, and we proved this, in fact, a few lectures ago, a few lectures ago as well, that if the absolute value of R is bigger than 1, then limit as n goes to infinity of R to the n,  limit does not exist, we showed it's, in fact, unbounded. This is R to the n is an unbounded
sequence, so it does not converge. So I'm using that theorem over there in a little bit around about way, let me state  let me restate this theorem over here, this theorem says if the series converges, then this limit
equal 0, now this statement is logically equivalent to the negation of the converse,  there's an actual word for that, but I can't remember, namely, that the negation of this implies the
negation of this, so a logically equivalent way to rewrite that statement over there is that  if this limit does not equal 0, so if it doesn't exist at all, that's also
finity, this implies that it does not converge. So this restatement of the theorem over there is really what I use to prove is really what I used here.  see that this theorem here is a one-way street, and I think you covered this example in
probably calculus, namely that one-way street in the sense that if xn converges, then this limit is 0, but the converse does not hold. Namely, it is not true that if this limit is 0, then this converges.  time.