 OK, so here we are again. So I'm going to finish real quick proof of a theorem that I stated last time
at last time due to Cantor, so let me recall the setting.  So this is finishing up what I have to say about cardinality, which
remember is a notion of size of sets and at the end for a given set a, then we defined the power set of a  to be the set of all subsets, and last time, for example, we did several of them, or looked at a few
different power sets, and the simplest example is that the power set of the empty set is the set containing the empty set, in particular, the power set has one more element than the empty set  the empty set has no elements, the power set of the empty set has one
element, namely the empty set. And we are looking at this to answer a question, which I posed at the end of last class, namely, all the sets we saw from the integers, to even numbers, to rational numbers,  which is on the assignment, all have the same cardinality as the
natural numbers, and that's what we call the countably infinite. And so a question would be, is there any set that is bigger than in cardinality, then the natural numbers, is there any set that's uncountable?  following if a is any set, so if a is a set, then the cardinality of a is strictly smaller than the
cardinality of the power set of a.  consequence is that the natural numbers have smaller
sides than the power set of the natural numbers, which has smaller size than the power set of the power set of the natural numbers, which is smaller in size than and so on.  to of infinite sizes, on sequence, I don't know if that's, OK. So let's prove this theorem, and it's an extremely clever and a bit mind-boggling  So first, let me prove that a has less than or equal to the
cardinality of the power set of a. So the first thing to show that the cardinality of a is less than or equal to the cardinality of the power set of a.  we need to find an injection, a 1 to 1 map from a into the power set of a, and the
simplest one to choose is one that takes an element of a to the set containing just that element. So define f from a into the power set of a by the function that  x, and this should spit out a subset of a, so this will be the subset that
consists solely of x. And this is clearly 1 to 1, and I'll prove this right now, then we need to prove that if f of x equals f of y, then x equals y, but this is sort of clear from the definition,  f of y, this means this set containing x, this is by the definition of how we've defined little f, means that the set containing x is equal to the set containing y, but this means x equals y.  Thus, f is 1 to 1, which since we found an injective map from a to the power set of a, this means  cardinality, we now show that a does not have the same
cardinality as the power set of a, and these two statements are what is meant when we write down, recall the definition, of the cardinality of a or size of a being smaller  than the cardinality of the power set of a. So we're going to do this by a proof by contradiction.  and arrive at a false statement. So assume that they do have the same cardinality. So this is our initial assumption, we're going to derive a false statement from this assumption, and the only way to arrive at a false statement
from a given assumption in a logically consistent
fashion  is that the original statement, namely this, is false. In other words, the thing we want to show is true. So let's assume they have the same
cardinality, what does that mean?  g going from a to the power set of a. Remember, a bijective function means that g is 1 to 1 and on 2. 1 to 1, meaning different things of a gets mapped to different things of the power set, on 2 means everything in the power set gets mapped on to from a.  And I'm going to define a kind of a weird set, and we're going to look at this set. So define a set b, and this is a subset of a, by b is the set of all x is in a, such that  x is not in f of x, this should be g. So remember, g maps from a to the power set. So for any given x and a, g of x is a subset of a. So the condition to be in b is that this element x is not in the
image of itself by g.  and b could be empty. There could be no x as in a that satisfy this, but it's just a subset of a. Simply by definition, we're just looking at elements in a that satisfy a certain condition.  of the power set of a, this is just how the power set is defined,
remember, it's all subsets of a. So b is an element of the power set of a, therefore, something gets mapped to be under this map.  there exists b in capital A such that g of little b equals capital B. So this just follows from the fact that g is a surjection, meaning everything in here must get mapped to by some element in A.  But now, let's take a look at this b guy. There are two cases, either b is in g of b or b is not in g of b.  if b is in g of b, remember this is equal to capital B, by definition, and to b in capital B means that x is not in g of x, but let me just write this again, this means b is in b, which means b is not in g of b.  So we started off with b and g of b and ended with b is not n g of b. So we arrive at a false statement in this case. Then there's one other case, b is not n g of b.  this immediately implies by the definition of capital of little b, meaning g of b is in capital B.  the definition of capital B, this implies that B is in capital B.  with this and ended with this. So what I've really proven is, so let's
ignore this contradiction mark here, thus we have shown that b and g of b implies b0 and g of b, b0 and g of b, b0 and g of b implies b is n g of b,  proven the statement that b is in g of b if and only if b is not in g of b, and this is a very false statement, cannot have some object being in the set if and only if it's not in the set.  which let us there, namely that the cardinality of the set a has the same
cardinality as the power set of a must have been false.  being Hoodwinged a little bit with this proof, but to give you some sort of clinging or connection
back to reality, what's underlying this argument  what's one way of understanding this argument is to think about, so in some sense, what this argument does is make you
talk about being in B while having to also reference B itself. And maybe this seems a bit wild because this is a math course,  do this statement just in the English language, if I am to tell you that I am a liar, then if that statement is true, then what I just said, namely that I'm a liar, is false, which means I'm not a liar.  false, meaning I'm not a liar, then that statement is true, which implies I am a liar. So of course, I would not lie to you, I would just give you
alternative facts, but that statement is kind of what's underlying this argument.  2 or false.  logic is contained and trying to verify this statement. OK, so that's all I'm going to say about
cardinality. We're going to move on to the real numbers now, and so this is  really, like I said, in the previous lecture, our first real goal of the class is to
describe R, namely what exactly is the set of real numbers, what characterizes a set of real numbers?  Let me state this as a theorem just completely ahead of time, so that it's there for us, and this is our goal, although we're not going to
prove it, our goal is just to understand what this theorem says.  ordered field containing Q with the least upper bound, property,  which we did know by R, a set of real numbers. OK, so as you sit there and listen to this, you shouldn't have maybe do, but you really shouldn't expect to have any idea about what this theorem says, what all these words mean.  lecture is to make sense of these words. So the rest you should understand, so our goal for this lecture is to make sense of these words,
order it field, at least upper bound property, because these are the two defining characteristics  And I'm not going to prove this theorem, we're just going to take it as a given. We could prove this theorem, but it takes quite a bit of time, and I rather start
studying properties of R than building R.  the proof of actually why certain things exist, but we are definitely
interested in the properties of that thing, once we know it exists. So let's get started on making sense of what this theorem says, let's start off with order stuff, this is ordered field,  What do I mean by order? We've kind of seen that just a little bit already when we talked about the natural
numbers and this well-ordering property of the natural numbers, but I was just using words to label a certain property of the natural numbers that I didn't say they meant anything specifically, it was just a label for that.  ordered sets and fields, so definition, an ordered set is a set S,  with a relation which we label with this less than and simple, and this relation satisfies two properties, one is you can always check whether two elements are bigger than or equal, so for all x, y and S,  x equals y, x is less than y, or that's just restating y is less than x.  So an ordered set is just a set with some
relation, which has two properties, namely that for any two elements in the set, I can compare the two, that's basically what this says, and I have this transitive property that if x is less than y and y is less than z, then x is less than z.  of mildly interesting definition, you should definitely try to come up with examples and non-examples. So what's the simplest example of an ordered set, the natural numbers, which we discussed earlier, but also the integers where I have to define what this
relation means, we say M is less  n n, this m is less than m if m minus m is a natural number. So this is how we define our order. So n is bigger than m if n minus m is a natural number. And you can check that this is just a usual  ordering on z, and that satisfies these two properties, the standard
order on Q, namely that we'll say Q is less than R if there exists natural numbers, Mn, such that R minus Q equals M over n  So these are just the usual orders of the integers and rational numbers that you're used to and that you know, I'm just writing out exactly how one would define this order, and you can check just using this definition of these
orders that these order satisfy 1 and 2.  Now, a simple non-example, which is a, I guess you could call it, it's a relation which satisfies 2, but not 1 is the following.  and create the power set of the natural numbers, and we define a relation a less than b by a is less than b if a is a subset of b.  So I'm just defining a relation on the power set, a less than b if a is a subset of b. And maybe I shouldn't even use less than, because this
make you think that it's automatically in order, so let's make it a script looking less than, then this relation is not an order, though.  relation as an order. So it's clear that it satisfies 2.  then a is a subset of c, i.e., a is less than c, just follows from the definition of what it means to be a subset of the other. If a is a subset of b, that means every element of a is an element of b, if b is an element of c, that means every element of b is an element of c, and therefore,
every element of a is an element of c,  this relation satisfies this second
transitive property, but it doesn't satisfy the first, I cannot always measure if one thing is bigger than the other,  for example, the set containing 0 does not equal the set
containing 1, if it neither of these things hold. So for something to be an order or is set to be an ordered set, it has  of this property that I can always compare two elements of this set. And for this relation, which seems like it could be an order, it satisfies the
second property, it does not satisfy the first property because I cannot always compare two subsets of the natural numbers by saying, one is a subset of the other.  but one is not bigger than the other.  to check that it does satisfy a condition 1 and 2, just
based on how it's defined. For example, this is the dictionary ordering of Q, Cartesian product Q. I think I wrote this down, I mean, you should know what the Cartesian product is of two things,  Recall that if I have two sets, the Cartesian product of a and b, this is a set of all ordered pairs of
elements from those sets. So the dictionary ordering of Q is what? So I need to define this relation, which I claim is an order.  We'll say that a, b is less than qr if 1 of 2 things happens, if either a is less than q, or a equals q,  b is less than R. So a dictionary or ordering or alphabetical
ordering of Q, you just check c, which is smaller first, if they're both equal, then you check the next letter, and see which one smaller there.  Q cross Q, making it an ordered set.  at least upper bound property, and this is really what sets R
part from Q, so we'll see in a minute that both R and Q are ordered fields, so that's not what separates R from Q, the rational numbers, but what does separate R from Q is the second property, at least upper bound property.  that would just be Q, we don't need to add anything to it, but it's the second property, this least
upper bound property that really separates R from Q.  let S be an ordered set and let E be a subset of S. So I'm going to make a series of
definitions here first if there exists an element of S, so not necessarily the set, necessarily the set I'm looking at, the subset I'm looking  such that for all x and E, x is less than or equal to b. So here, I have this order less than or equal to, means just what it means in English, either x is less than b or x is equal to b, and the same thing with bigger than or equal to, and so on, but just keep in mind that,  this order is a, or this ordered set is a general ordered set, you could think of it as the
dictionary ordering on c, cross c. So if there exists a b such that for all x and e, x is less than or equal to b, then we say that e is bounded above,  and this element of b is an upper bound for E. So if I can find some element of my set bigger than
everything in this set,  that E, I say E is bounded above, and B is an upper bound, I also have lower bounds if there exists a B and S such that for all x and E, B is smaller than or equal to everything in E, so B is less than or equal to x,  is bounded below, and b is a lower bound for E. So b sits below everything in E.  Now, we call an element in S, the least,  upper bound, for E, if it satisfies two conditions, 1 is, well, if it's an up, at least
upper bound, it should at least be an upper bound, B is an  upper bound for b and it should be, in some sense, the least of all upper bound. So if I take any other upper
bound, b sub 0 should sit below that one.  OK, so an element is the least upper bound for set E, if it's an upper bound, and it's the least
among all other upper bounds, it sits below every other upper bound. And in this case, we also say B0 is the supremum,  of E, and we write b not equals sup E. Now, this was having to deal with upper bounds, we can also deal with
lower bounds, or we also have a definition corresponding to lower bounds for what would be the greatest  we call an element of S, the greatest lower bound for E, if two
conditions hold, which is similar to the conditions we had for at least upper bound, except now for lower bounds,  b0 is a lower bound for E, and it is the greatest of all
lower bounds if b is any lower bound for E, then b  is less than or equal to b0. And so there's some let-name attached to at least upper bound, so there's a let-name attached to a
greatest lower bound, which we call the infimum.  of e and we write the 0 equals inf e. So we have, small, the
interesting and complex definition, which means we should look at some examples to get a field for it.  So let's take our big ordered set to be z, and let's
take our set E to be 1 minus 1, 0, and 2.  what is the supremum, what is the infimum? So really, if I'm going to make a statement, something is equal to the supremum or something is equal to the infimum, I should actually give a proof of that, meaning if I say something's infimum or something is a supremum, then I need to prove that it satisfies these two
conditions and these two conditions, but I'm just going over examples.  so I will not give a full proof of that, this is just to get some intuition going. Now, first off, what would be an upper bound for E? Well, 3, 4, 5, 2 is an upper bound, because 2 is bigger than or equal to everything in the set.  So, 2, 3, 4, 5, these are all upper bounds for this set E, but what is the supremum, meaning the least upper bound? Well, that would be 2. If I take anything less than 2, that's not an upper bound, because there's something in the set bigger than that.  then this is going to be bigger than 2, but 2 is still an upper bound. So 2 is the least upper bound. Now, what about lower bound? Well, a lower
bound would be minus 1, because minus 1 is bigger than or is less than or equal to everything in the set, but then so would be minus 2, minus 3, and so on.  lower bound would be minus 1. Now, let's do another example.  S, the rational numbers, and let's take E to be set of rational numbers, such that 0 is bigger than or equal to
cue is between 0 and 1, and 1, inclusive. So then what are some upper bounds?  Now everything in E is less than or equal to 1, so 1 is also perfectly
good upper bound, 3 halves, 5 ports, 6 fifths, 7, 6, anything bigger than or equal to 1 is also an upper bound for this set.  would be 1. So if I were to try to draw a Q, so for this set, let's not do that. Now, I know you usually draw this line as for the real number line,  let's imagine it's Q, so everything bigger than or equal to 1 sits above everything in E, so everything
bigger than or equal to 1 is an upper bound, and the least upper bound is 1. What are some lower bounds? Well, everything in this set E is bigger than or equal to 0, so 0 is a lower bound, so is minus 1 1,  third minus 1, 4, minus 1, 5, and so on, but anything less than or equal to 0 is a
lower bound, nothing a bigger than 0 can be a lower bound because I can always find some, so this is not a proof, but this is some explanation.  bigger than 0 is not at lower bound, because what? If I take some number, call it R, bigger than 0 and say less than 1, then R cannot be a lower bound because I can find something in E less than R, namely R over 2.  So therefore, and we're going to do some proofs where we actually have to get our hands dirty and
proved something in the infimum or the supremum, so you'll see how that works, but for now, let's just go off of intuition, the infimum of this set is 0.  of these examples so far have this property that both the sup and the inf
belong to the set E that I'm looking at, but this is not necessarily always a case, so I could change this slightly. So our universe, the ordered set we're looking at looking in is still Q, and this subset E is now  let's say Q is bigger than 0 and less than 1, then sup of E is still going to be 1, but this is not an element of this set E.  And, like why is the infimum is still 0, but it's not an element of E. So there are situations where you have a subset, a subset of an ordered set, which has an infimum and supremum, which do not exist in this
smaller set you're looking at. Whether or not the supremum or infimum exist in the
interversearch that you're looking at in the bigger set  is an entirely different issue, in fact, that's the next issue we're going to
talk about. So let me just reiterate what we saw a minute ago, so we can be in some ordered set, z or Q, and the smaller set, which we're taking the inf and sup  and it could belong to this smaller set, for example, in this case, 1 and 0 were in the set, E or not. There is this case where neither of them were in E, and of course, if I put less than or equal to here, then I would have the inf and E and the sup, not in E, and then vice versa. So infs and supes of these sets don't necessarily need to belong to  that set you're looking at, but they at least exist in the set in the
big set, Q. Now, big ordered sets, so this ordered set that has this property that the inf and sup of bounded above and below sets exist in the bigger set, always, is what we call an ordered set with the least upper bound  property, so definition, ordered set S as the least  property, if every subset of S, which is non-empty, and bounded above,  as a supremum in S. So a set has the least upper bound property, if every non-empty
bounded set has a supremum.  And so we could come up with simple examples of sets that do have the least upper bound property, for example, let's take S to be, this is the simplest one, S with a single element, let's say 0,  there's no order to put on it, I mean, every element in here is equal to itself, and therefore, every non-empty subset of S is just the whole set, and the
supremum would then be that one element. So this is kind of the silliest one you could do.  I mean, you could have two elements, and then if E is a subset of S, E is 1 of 4 guys, if E is a non-empty subset of S here, the 1 is 1, 0 is less than 1, if E is equal to 0, then sup equals 0, if E is equal to 1, sup  b equals 1, and if E is equal to 0, 1, this implies sup E equals 1. So this is in S, this is in S, this is in S. So every subset of S, which is not empty, has a supremum in S. So these are not the most interesting examples of sets with this  at least upper bound property. So for example, maybe a more interesting one would be if I take S to be, let's say, I'm going to put dots here, minus 3, minus 2, minus 1.  with the usual ordering coming from the integers, so minus 2 is less than minus 1, minus 3 is less than
minus 2 and so on, I claim this set does have the least upper bound property, why? Because if E is a subset of S, E, non-empty, in fact,  So both of these, this was always always bounded above, because there's only two elements, and you can choose
a biggest 1, 1, 1, every subset of S is also bounded above by minus 1, so every subset of S is automatically bounded above. So I just need to check that every non-empty set has a supremum in S. If E is a subset of S and is non-empty, then let me look  the set minus e, this is a label, this is not meant to mean anything
always, this is a label, which is the set of elements minus x. So I take all my elements in e, which is a subset of the negative integers, I take their minuses, this is now a subset of natural numbers,  by the well-ordering property of the natural numbers, there exists an element in minus E, such that it sits below everything in minus E for all x  in E, which means that for all x in E, x is less than or equal to minus M. And I'll let you think about this just for a minute.  minus e, therefore, minus m is in e, so and m less than or equal to minus x for all x
and e implies that for all x in capital E, x is less than or equal to minus m, and therefore, I found an element actually in the set, capital E, that's bigger than or equal to everything in the set, you can convince yourself for right down a formal proof  to be like, that this implies that minus M is therefore the supremum.  set that's bounded above to a different set, a subset of a subset of the
natural numbers, you can also show, for example, z is as the least upper bound property, which I'm going to now shorten,  it's a lot of things to write, L, you be p, p, at least upper
bound property, the integers also have this property. But the integers are not all that interesting, again, because I cannot divide by an integer and say in the set.  in the rational numbers, however, Q does not have this property.  the out-and-front, you does not have the least upper bound property. And where does this come from?  I don't want to call it Greek mythology, but maybe it's Greek mythology, strictly speaking, that some guy discovered that the square root of 2 is not a
rational number, and then he got thrown off a cliff.  but it does not have square roots of prime numbers, but square root of 2 in it, and this then manifests itself in this least
upper bound property by giving an example of a set which is bounded above, which does not have a supremum in the set Q.  if E is a set of rational numbers, so I have not stated a theorem yet, but I'm just telling you what
what we're about to do, if E is a subset of rational numbers where positive and B squared is less than 2,  So, sup e does not exist in rational numbers. So therefore, we would have found a set which is
bounded above, which does not have a supremum in the rational numbers, and therefore, the rational numbers do not have the least upper bound property.  to spell all this out. So first, I'm going to prove a theorem about what the supremum of such a set would have to satisfy.  this set, then x is bigger than or equal to 1, and x squared equals 2.  So we're just saying, I mean, I don't try to take this as a
necessarily contradicting what I wrote there because that was not a statement of a theorem, yet I'm stating this theorem that if I have such a supremum in Q of this set, then it would have to square and give me 2.  that is the supremum of this set, then it has to be bigger
than or equal to 1 and it squares 2. So let's give a proof of this, because I don't want to keep writing this set again.  And suppose we have an element of Q, which is the supremum of E,  So first off, what would be one element of E? What's one rational number
who square is less than 2? 1. So since 1 is in E, square is less than 2, and x is the supremum of E, meaning it's an upper bound for E, it must be bigger than or equal to every  and E, in particular for 1, that implies x is bigger than or equal to 1. So that's the first
part of the theorem we want to prove. So now we're going to prove two inequalities to show that x squared is actually equal to 2.  things that I would like to show equal to each other, sometimes a way to show that is by showing
1 is less than or equal to that, and this is less than or equal to that. So one side is less than or equal to the other side and vice versa, which immediately implies and must equal each other.  what we're going to do, and we're going to now prove that x squared is bigger than or equal to 2, we'll then prove that x squared is less than or equal to 2, and therefore, x squared equals 2.  everything else we've done so far is still true, but now we want to prove this
statement, so we're going to assume that this statement is false.  Now, define a certain certain rational number, h, which it's the smaller of two rational numbers, it's going to be the
smaller of 1, 1, 1, 1, and 2 minus x squared over 2 over 2 over 2, x plus 1, and let me just reiterate, this is less than 1, because it's the smaller of 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1,  Now, when you write a proof, as you'll see, it's going to be magic that somehow this h does something
magical, that's not exactly how you come up with proofs. What how it comes up is you take an inequality that you want to mess with, you fiddle around with it, and you see that if h is given by something, then it breaks the inequality, or it satisfies the inequality, which  So since x squared is less than 2, h is positive, right? It's the minimum of 1, 1, 1, and this number. So if it's a 1, if it's positive, if it's this one, then it's still positive.  is in E, it square is less than 2. This will give us our contradiction, because x is supposed to be an upper bound for E, and therefore, x is supposed to be bigger than or equal to x plus h, but this is x plus a positive number, x plus a positive
number is bigger than x. So how do we do this? Well, we have to compute the square of this and show it's less than 2.  And that's where our choice of h comes from. We compute that x plus h squared, this is x squared plus 2x, plus 2x, plus h squared.  2, x, h plus h, y because h times h is less than h since h is less than 1. So this is kind of why we chose h to be less than 1 so that I can get rid of this square and somehow just have a
single h floating around, which I can then use to show x plus h is in e.  So when I write this string of inequalities, this thing is supposed to be equal to the next thing. This is not saying x plus h squared is equal to what I'm
about to right now. So this is equal to x squared plus 2x plus 1 times h. Now, h is the minimum of these two numbers. So h is going to be smaller than or equal to this thing.  and so this is 2 minus x squared over 2, all right, this way. So I have what I have 4, and then times 2 minus x squared over 2, 2x plus 1, so now some magic is
happening, this cancels with that, and I have 2 minus x squared over 2, which is  less than 2 minus x squared, so less than x squared plus 2 minus x squared, because I took a
half of it equals 2. So summarizing, you started off with x plus x plus h squared, and we showed it was less than 2.  x plus h is an E, but if I have an element of E, let's see where we on space,  But I have an element of E, which is bigger than x, so that implies that x is not equal to the supremum of the set.  for the set. Something's not an upper bound if you can find something in the set bigger than b0, and this is also a good
exercise to do when you come across a new definition is to try and negate it to understand it a little bit better.  Well, let me write this here, b0 is not, so what's the negation of being an upper bound? So not an upper bound for E if there exists an x in E such that x is bigger than b0.  So going back to our proof, we have found an element of our set E, which is bigger than x, which means that x is not the
supremum of E, which is a contradiction to our assumption.  thus, our assumption that x squared bigger than or equal to 2, I mean less than 2, which is
different from our assumptions of the theorem, is false.  OK.  to. So we now show x squared equals 2. So this is not exactly the proof, just I'm going to rewrite it a little differently, so it's maybe clear that instead of showing
also x squared  is less than or equal to 2, which we know the less than and cannot
happen, let's just show that x squared cannot be bigger than 2. Since x squared is bigger than or equal to 2, this means either x squared equals 2, which we want to show, or x squared is bigger than 2.  let's rule out this case. We now show that the case x squared bigger than 2 cannot hold. So suppose otherwise, this is going to be a proof by contradiction as well.  anyways, so let's show this cannot hold. So we're going to do this by contradiction as well. So we're trying to show this cannot hold, so let's assume that it does hold. So that's the negation of what we want to show, which is this statement that x squared
or greater than 2 does not hold.  assume x squared is bigger than 2. So what we're going to do is we're going to find an upper bound for the set
e, which is strictly smaller than x. And we're going to have to do that next time because I think I'm going to be going to run out of time.  I'm going to
do it.