 So let's continue our discussion of
sequences of functions.  of convergence of sequences of functions, so the first notion was
pointwise convergence, so we have a sequence of functions f n from some set S to R, another function, fixed function, S from f from S to R, and then we say f converges to f n converges to f n,  point y is if, for every x in S, the sequence of real numbers
converges to f of x. So if for all x in S, the limit as n goes to infinity of f n of x equals f of x. So I take an x out of S, stick it into f n, so now I get a sequence  numbers, and I should get f of x as n goes to infinity. And then we introduced a stronger notion of convergence of functions, which was the following.  uniformly on S if somehow, somehow across the entire set, fn gets close to S. So here, this statement says, if I take for each fixed x, eventually fn of x, so fn evaluated at that point is close to f of x, f
evaluated at that point, but uniform convergence says fn is close to f  across the entire set, so if for all epsilon positive, there exists
natural number M so that for all n bigger than or equal to M, for all x and S, f n of x minus f of x is less than epsilon. Now, if you write out what this means in terms  of epsilon M. Remember, this is a limit, so this is a limit of
sequences, so this means something in terms of epsilon's and M's, this would say, for all x and S, for all epsilon positive, there exists an M, so on.  a kind of meaningless difference in the way you write the definition, meaning this is a stronger
statement than if the x is appearing here, so what am I going on about? So first off, we proved last time that if I have a sequence of functions, again, from subset S to R,  converging to f uniformly, then this implies fn converges to f point y's.  by uniform convergence. And we were just going to look at a very specific example, which I was going to state as a theorem.  x to the n, and now we're looking on the
unit interval 0, 1, and let f be the function that is 0 if x is in 0, 1, 1, x equals 1.  So first off, let me, from last time, or you can even just check by looking at the form of fn that fn converges to f point-wise, if I take x in this interval here, so not equal to 1, then x is strictly less than 1, and if I raised it to a
high enough power over  and over again, that's converging to 0, so it converges to f of x0. Now, at 1, I just get 1, and that
clearly converges to 1, so fn converges to f point y's. And so the claim is that for all b between 0 and 1, fn converges to f, and I guess I could  include 0, that would just be looking at one point, and not very
interesting, but fn converges to f uniformly. And the second is, fn does not converge to f uniformly on the whole interval, however.  you're supposed to think about when it comes to a uniform
convergent, so we have the limiting function f n, I mean, f, and then we draw a little epsilon-sized collar around the function f, and then uniform convergence, so this is f,  that as long as I go far enough out, the graph of fn should be within this little epsilon
color, so that fn is getting close to f uniformly across the entire set.  which, like I said, you should always, so we're actually doing two things here, we're giving an example of
uniform convergence and also a sequence of functions which does not converge uniformly to this function, so we're doing both an example and non-example, which is the best thing to do for a new definition.  So let b be bn0, 1, then the limit as n goes to infinity of b to the n is 0, which implies, so now I'm getting a
head of myself, not right that yet. So now we want to prove uniform convergence of fn  on an infinite this statement, fn to f uniformly on, sorry, about that, b. So I have uniform convergence on any smaller interval, other than 0, 1.  as n goes to infinity, and now we want to prove that fn converges to f
uniformly on this interval 0, b, so let epsilon be positive. We now have to find an M so that fn is close to 0, because f is 0 on such an interval.  natural number M such that for all n bigger than or equal to M, b to the n is
less than epsilon, then for all n bigger than or equal to M, we get, and also for all x, 0b, we get that f n of x minus f of x, so b is less  1, so when I stick it into f, I just get 0, this is equal to x to the n minus 0, and
absolute value is just x to the n because we're looking at non-negative x. And now, x is in this interval 0, b, so it's less than or equal to b, so x of the n is going to be less than or equal to b to the n, and this is less than epsilon.  So just as when we looked at uniform continuity of a function, it was a statement like for all epsilon, there exists a delta, which just depends on the epsilon in the function.  find an M, which does not depend on the point x. So for every epsilon, you can find an M
depending only on epsilon and maybe the function little f, but that doesn't depend on x.  So now, let's prove number 2. So first off, let's negate the definition so that we know what we're talking about. So fn does not converge to f uniformly on a set S.  if there exists a bat so every for all becomes a there exists. So if there exists some bad epsilon 0 positive
so that for all M, natural number, there exists an n bigger than or equal to M, and there exists an x in S so that fn of x  minus f of x is bigger than or equal to epsilon0. So this is the negation, but why should we not be surprised that f n does not converge to f uniformly on 0, 1, if you believe this picture?  So let me draw now the graph of f, and let's say I take epsilon to be, I don't know, a fourth, say.  So, now this is what my little epsilon neighborhood of f looks like, or epsilon 2 is, it's right along for epsilon equals 1, say, a 2 around 0 up to x equals 1, and then it's a little
area around 1. And now, if I were to have uniform convergence,  then as long as n is very large, fn has to be within this area that I have here, so in fact, let me show you it in.  it starts at 0 and ends at 1 and looks something like that, which means here, always, it
leaves this epsilon 2 around f, this epsilon color, I guess, epsilon f n leaves the shaded area, which is where it's supposed to  intuitive explanation is clear, and why it shouldn't be too big of a surprise that fn does not converge to f uniformly on 0 or 1.  is that there exists a bad and epsilon 0 so that we have all of this. So the point is, choose epsilon so that this never intersects with this epsilon
nearlihood of the function down here, never intersects with this epsilon neighborhood of just the point x equals 1, y equals 1.  is epsilon 0 to be 1 1, so now we have to prove for all n there exists a n, so let m be a natural number,  to be, let's say, 1 over 4 to the 1 over m. Now, this is a number less than 1, so it's n-th root is less than 1, and also positive.  and f sub m of this x, which is just 1 over 1 over 4 to the 1 over m, now raised to the
1 over m, now raised to the m-th power, is 1 over 4, which implies that f of m of x minus f of x is equal 1, 4, which equals epsilon 0.  So, basically, if you choose any, so there was nothing special about epsilon 0, being 1, 4, you choose anything less than
1 that would do.  1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 over m, just as long as I don't choose
epsilon 0 to be equal to 1.  So we had another sequence of functions we had looked at last time, which were these functions that look like little, that look like 10ths, I don't know why I'm making this
x is bigger when it should be the other one.  point, and then it's piecewise linear, so then it's just a straight line down to here, I'm not going to
write down exactly the equation for each piece, but then 0 to 1, so this is fn, and we proved that, so last time, we proved that f  and converges to the function 0 point y's, but it does not converge uniformly to 0.  fn would have to be within this little strip for all n sufficiently large, but fn is getting taller and taller, so it always
leaves any strip that I put around the function 0. So fn does not converge to 0 uniformly, we can make a proof out of that, though.  tell you where talking about, and this should be on 0, 1. So why not? Well, we can take any epsilon 0, really, so let's choose epsilon 0 to be 1, let M be a natural number.  and the n and an x so that this inequality is satisfied, so let's choose n to be m, x to be 1 over 2m, this
point where I peak, then f of m of x minus f of x, now, f here is just 0, the limiting function is 0, so let me not even put f, let me put  S equals f m of 1 over 2m, which equals 2m, and this is certainly bigger than or
or equal to 1, which is epsilon 0.  host of examples, it seems like I've only given you maybe one example
up to this point of functions which converge uniformly to something, but in a minute, I'll give you a very useful test to decide when a series involving functions converges uniformly.  let's revisit these three questions that we asked in the last lecture in the
context of power series, but now in this more general setting of convergence of functions.  Now, and essentially, the last week of the class, and we're really getting to the first real part of
analysis, so I was talking with a professor from Duke one time, and he made this funny observation that somehow in math, and I think this is not just math, but this is a lot of science-based classes,  And if you were to translate it into a study in a book, it's like you spend a year
studying introductions to a book, and then you spend a year studying middle parts of books, and then you spend another year studying the last parts of books. So now here, we're starting to get into the middle part of the book of analysis, not the textbook where at the end of that, but at least in the grand scheme of things, which is the interchange  limits. You have two limiting
limiting processes that you want to interchange, and analysis first, God created the limit, and then man asked, can we interchange limits? And so what do I mean by that?  the very hard of analysis is when can we interchange limit? So let me give you the simplest example, let's say we have the
following limit, so I take the limit as k goes to infinity of the limit as n goes to infinity of n over k, n over k plus 1. So that's just a sequence, depending on n and k.  to get, this is just equal to, like, and multiply the bottom by k to get
get rid of this one, so then I just get n over n plus k, remember, k's fixed, and then I take the limit as n goes to infinity, so I get 1. So I'm taking the limit as k goes to infinity of this expression. Now, for each k, when I take the limit as n goes to infinity, I get 1.  so I get 1 there. Now, what happens if I interchange the limit? And now, look at the limit as n goes to infinity of the limit as k goes to infinity of n over k plus 1. Well, now as k goes to infinity for each n, so remember, I'm taking the limit as n goes to infinity of this
expression, which  formally, this expression with the limits
interchange, this is equal to 0 over 0 plus 1 equals 0, and these two do not equal each other. So it's not always a case that you can interchange limits.  certain statements, do certain computations, you need to be able to interchange limits, and what kind of limits maybe
taking an infinite sum and integrating, or like we stated in the beginning, power series are, in a sense, a certain limit, there are limit of partial sums of their limit of polynomials,  that's a limit. So if a natural question, like we said last time, is the derivative of this infinite sum, the infinite sum of the
divitive, those are two limiting two-limiting processes, which we're asking, can we interchange? So the three questions, again, that I asked in terms of power series, I'm going to now frame, again, in this general setting,  if fn from S to R, f from S to R, and fn converges to f, maybe pointy's are uniformly, so let's leave this open ended for now, because these are the only two
notions we have of convergence.  And let me make, so suppose fn is from S to R, f is S to R, and fn converges to f point y is where uniformly, and so this
sense is not written very well, and fn is continuous for all n, then is f  continuous. So suppose we have a sequence of continuous
functions converging to another function f, either point y is or uniformly, is the limiting function continuous, and I'll explain in a minute why this is a limit, kind of asking, can we interchange two limits,  is differentiable for all n, f from a, b to R, and we have that fn converges to f, either point y is our uniform, we're leaving this
open ended for now, and the derivatives also converge, say,  function g, then is f, differentiable, and the limit of the
derivatives equal to the derivative of the limit.  And then last question, so this is the third kind of main
limiting process we've seen in this class, which is integration, close f n is a sequence of continuous functions, f is a continuous function,  and fn converges to f, again, maybe either point y's or uniformly, where
leave in this open ended for now, does the limit of the intervals equal the interval of the limit  Now, again, I want you to, it's really, I guess, more clear here, the fact that we're
asking about interchange to limits. So here, we have this integration is just a symbol for taking this limit in process, where you take a sequence of partitions of a, b with norm converging to 0, then the integral from a to b of f n, this is defined to be this limit of  So this is a limiting process here, although I'm writing it with this
simple notation, so I'm asking, can I take this limit as n goes to infinity, and can I interchange it with this limit process? Now, for continuity, it's maybe a little more hidden on what's the interchange of limits that you're really looking at, so it looks more like this.  for 1, we're asking, suppose x is in set S, xn is a sequence converging to x, then  this, now I would like to show that f of x is equal to the limit as n goes to infinity of f of x sub n.  x sub k, I would like to show that equals f of x, if I'm trying to show that the limit is
continuous, assuming the functions that are converging to f are continuous, if I look at the limit as k goes to infinity, then I'm tempted to do the following, that this is equal to the limit as k goes to infinity of the limit as n goes to infinity of f n of x, assuming either point y is convergence or uniform convergence  xk, and now if I'm just being a little bit careless, I interchange limits, and write this as the limit as n goes to infinity of the limit as k goes to infinity. So here is where I'm asking, can I interchange limits? Again, this is not a proof, this is discussion on what is the
interchange of limits  that I'm looking at for question number 1, question number 3 is more clear, and then for this, once I've done this,
differentability will be a little bit clear on what is the interchange of limits I'm looking at.  continuous, then the limit as k goes to infinity of fn of x sub k, and x sub k converges to x, this just gives me fn of x, and so, and since fn, again, converges to f, in some sense, this should give me f of x. So what I'm asking is, was all this OK, because at some point, at this point, in particular, I had to
interchange a limit, and we've just seen that we can't always do  that we can't always interchange limits and get the same thing, here, we've got 1, when we interchange limit, we've got 0, so it's not always a
case that I can interchange limits this inequality between this limit and the interchange limit is the big question mark.  are enough. Now, the answer to these three questions is, in fact, yes, but only for
uniform convergence, if f, if all if the convergence  And this is the mode of convergence we must have so that the answer to all of these three questions, which we'll state and prove as theorems, are correct.  is the answer to any of these questions, yes, and we'll know. So the answer to all three of these questions is no, if we only
assume pointy is convergence.  So let's go through an example showing that each of these three
questions is no if we only assume point-wise convergence. So let's look at an example showing one is no if we only assume point-wise convergence, and we basically already have it on the board,  c, x to the n on 0, 1, x is n, x is n, then each of these functions, so then for all n, f n is a continuous
function on 0, 1,  fn converges to f point y's, let f itself is not a continuous function. So this provides an example of a sequence of functions which converges pointy to a function which is not continuous.  converges uniformly to a function f, then that function is continuous. Here, if we only
assume pointy's convergence, we may not get a continuous function in the end. And this is what this example shows, f n of x equals x to the n, these are all continuous functions, they converge to a function which is not continuous pointy.  to get example 2, now, basically, we take the previous example and
integrate it to get an example of a sequence of functions that converges and its derivative converges point-wise.  then a couple of things, fn converges to 0, fn prime converges to the function f, which is the same function from here.  And these are point y's. So I have a sequence of differentiable functions that converge point y's to something, and the derivatives also
converge point y's to something.  0, but g is not equal to f prime. The derivative of f, the constant function
function 0 is just 0, g is equal to this function, which is 0 if x is n, 0, 1, and 1 if x is equal to 1. So here, we see that the derivative of the limit is not the limit of the derivatives. If we only assume pointy is convergence of the functions,  Now, the last example showing that 3 does not hold if we only
assume point-wise convergence is also on the board. It's the whole point of this one up there.  So here, fn from 0 to 1 to R is this 10th function, 1 over n, 1 over 2n, 2n, 2n,  it's just piecewise linear, so it's 0 from 1 over n to 1, and it goes up to 1 over 2n, 2n, and then back down to the origin. And so we know that fn converges to 0 point y. Now, the interval of 0 is just 0.  let's look at the interval of f n from 0 to 1, the interval of 0, 1 of f n. Now, if we were all together, this would be the point where I stop and ask if anybody can remember the
area of a triangle, even though we're in this advanced analysis class, but I don't get to ask you that, I get to just ask  that, and I know the answer, because I've prepared, and only because of that, this is 1,5, base times the height. So remember, the interval is an
area, and I could write down the formula of what this function is, and actually integrate it out using the fundamental theorem of calculus,
but just go with me on this, that the interval of f in is just the area of this triangle  has base starting at 0 and going to 1 over n, and it peaks at 2n, so the base is 1 over n, the height is 2n, so this equals 1 for all n.  number 1, which is just 1 for all n, does not converge to the
interval of the limit. So in this case, the limit of the intervals is not the integral of the limit. If we only, in what's the reason, because we only have point-wise convergence, like I said a minute ago, the answer is, yes, to all three of these questions,  if the convergence is uniform, and what these three examples are supposed to show you as the
answer is no if I only assume point-wise convergence, the weaker notion of convergence.  So first, the first theorem address is question 1. Suppose fn from S to R, f from S to R, fn is continuous, meaning it's continuous at every point in S, for all n.  fn converges to f uniformly on S. Then the conclusion is, then f is continuous.  I mean, we've done several proofs like this before, but for some reason, and at least I see in textbooks for this proof, they
always refer to it as an epsilon over 3 argument, and then it's the last time that call it an epsilon over 3 argument.  let epsilon be positive, we have to find a delta so that for all x minus c less than delta, an
absolute value, f of x minus f of c is less than epsilon, and what we're going to do is for basically going to replace f by some f m for m large enough, and the fact that we have uniform convergence is what allows us to do that.  the f n's converge to f uniformly, there exists a natural number M, so that for all n bigger than or equal to M, for all y and S, f M of y minus f of y is less than epsilon over 3.  OK, now this f sub capital M, I'm just going to fix, so this should be n. But now, I mean, so this is for all n bigger than or
or equal to capital M, I really just need 1, so let's look at f sub capital M, that's a continuous function,  of capital M is continuous, there exists a delta positive, so that for all x minus if x is within distance delta to c,  sub m of x minus f sub m of c is less than epsilon over 3. So then this delta here, so I have been, OK, so I'm doing something what I stop doing something, which I was doing in all previous lectures when I would say there exists a delta 0, choose delta to be this delta 0, there
exists a M0, choose M to be this M0, now I'm actually saying  I've dropped that and stop doing that because it should be clear from the
context, now what I'm choosing delta to be. So then for all x minus c less than delta, so I'm saying that I'm now choosing this delta that came from here, which came from f sub capital M, capital M, capital M came from this, what I needed here.  x minus f of c, which I want to show is less than epsilon. Now, if I add and subtract f sub m of x and f sub
m of c and use the triangle inequality, this is less than or equal to f of x minus f sub m of x plus f sub m of x plus f sub m of x minus f sub m of c plus f sub m  f of c. So I just added and subtracted f sub m of x and f of m of c, and then use the
triangle inequality. Now, by this estimate here, since I'm looking at a particular n, basically equal to m, I have this is less than epsilon over 3, no matter what y is in this set,  then certainly for x, I'll have this is less than epsilon over 3. How I chose delta, remember, was to guarantee that this would be less than
epsilon over 3, as long as x minus c is less than delta. And then, of course, this one is less than epsilon over 3, again, because of this uniform closeness of f m2f.  less than delta, I have f of x minus f of x minus f of c is less than epsilon, and that
finishes the proof. So if we have uniform convergence, then the uniform, so a good theorem should be able to be stated in one sentence, and what this are at least some simple, an easy way to remember it, what this says is the uniform limit of continuous functions  So the uniform limit of continuous functions is continuous. Next, we'll show, in a sense, the uniform limit of
differentiable functions is continuous, and we're going to do kind of a  statement of that, although one can make stronger statements, but in practice, this one
suffices really, at least in where it pops up later in life.  be the short way of saying that, the interval of the uniform limit is the limit of the
intervales, something like that. That would be the short and sweet way of stating the following theorem, which is, so this is an answer to 3, so we skipped over 2 for a minute, goes f n is a sequence of continuous functions on a, b,  We're going to be talking about limits, and we've only, I mean,
enternargoes and we've only spoken about intervals for continuous functions, suppose f n is a continuous function on a, b, f from a, b to R, and f n converges to f uniformly.  So by what we just proved in the previous theorem, this automatically
garranties that f is a continuous function so we can ask about the relationship between the interval of f and the limit of the intervals of f n, then the limit as n goes to infinity,  the integral from a, b to f. So the integral of the uniform limit is the limit of the
intervals. So this is just a sequence of numbers, and we want to show it converges to this number here. So let's do this the old fashion way,  let epsilon be positive, since fn converges to f uniformly, there exists a natural number M, such that for all n, for all n bigger than or equal to M, for all x in a, b,  minus f of x is less than epsilon. Now, basically, what we're going to do is
integrate this inequality. And remember, integration, unlike differentiation, integration respects inequalities. And for all n bigger than or equal to M, meaning I'm choosing my M as this guy for this  I look at the interval from a, b of fn minus the interval of a, b to f, this is by linearity of the
interval, the interval of fn minus f, absolute value, by the triangle inequality for intervals, which we proved, this is less than or equal to the interval from a, b of fn minus f. And what do we know for all n bigger than or equal to m?  this function here, fn of x minus f of x in absolute value, is bounded by epsilon. And therefore, the interval of this side is going to be less than the
interval of the right side. So I did this wrong, let's put a b minus a over this. So this is less than interval a, b, epsilon over b minus a. And so then I just pick up this number times the
times the length of the interval  which equals epsilon. So for all n bigger than or equal to M, the absolute value of this
interval of f of f sub n minus the interval of f is less than epsilon. So the interval of the uniform limit is the limit of the intervals. So now we'll use this to do the last interchange of limits  theorem that I had in mind, so number 2, so, and again, this is the simplest
statement and maybe easiest to prove that one can make stronger statements and prove them, but in most cases, this suffices.  So this is a continuously
differentialable for all n, f and g, these are two functions from a, b to R, and fn converges to f uniformly on a, b  and the derivatives converge uniformly to this function g, and in fact, I don't even need this, you could just say pointwise.  assuming everything is continuously
continuously differentiable, if I'm assuming the sequences are continuous,  the derivative of f is equal to g, meaning that the uniform limit of the
derivatives converges to the derivative of f. So again, what this says is the uniform limit of, or at least in S in the spirit is not exactly what it says, but it says the uniform limit of a continuous
continuous,
continuous,
continuous,
interval functions, is differentiable.  And at the derivative of the uniform limit of the
uniform limit of the uniform limit of the derivatives, to prove this, we use a fundamental theorem of calculus.  point in a, b, then by the fundamental theorem of calculus, if I want f n of x, if I not 1, but take f n of x minus f n of a, this is equal to the
interval from a to x of fn prime, the interval of the derivative gives me back the function evaluated at the endpoints.  therefore, since I know pointywise convergence, these two numbers
converge pointy to f of x and f of a respectively, so f of x minus f of a equals the limit as n goes to infinity of f of n of x minus f n of a, and this is equal to, just by the previous expression,  as n goes to infinity of the interval from a to x of f prime, now fn prime, now these fn prime's are converging to g, this function g uniformly, and therefore, the
intervales converge, that's what we just proved. So this equals the interval of the limit, and therefore, so we started off with f  of x minus f of a, and we showed it's equal to the
interval from a to x of g. So f of x equals f of a plus cn over r from a to x of g. But now, again, by the fundamental theorem of calculus, this implies that f is differentiable, and the derivative of f of x  the derivative of f is equal to the derivative, so remember f of a, that's just a constant
equals the derivative of this function, which is g.  pretty good theorem, pretty good, it's is very good. And then we'll use it in our next lecture to discuss, or at least conclude some answers that we
or at least conclude some answers that we originally asked about power series  So this theorem is due to the godfather of the godfather of the irstrass dross, I don't know, did I refer to him as a godfather or a
remon as a godfather, anyways, I think it was irassistration that I refer to as godfather, to prove the following theorem, when can you guarantee uniform convergence for at least series of functions, which are limits of partial sum, so limits of functions,  and he proved this, basically, so he could come up with a whole host of examples for continuous functions which are nowhere
differentiable, we kind of gave a proof of this theorem when we looked at that example, where we were talking about differentiability, but we didn't state it as a theorem there.  a sequence of functions f j from S to R, and suppose there exists a sequence M j such that two things hold.  I don't know why I just erased that. So we have a sequence of functions from S to R in a sequence of positive
numbers so that these numbers dominate the f j's.  j equals 1 to infinity, so is convergent.  then we have two conclusions, the first one is pretty
obvious for all x and S, this series, where I just take x and stick it into f sub j, this converges absolutely, and the second  If I define now the function to be the sum of these series, then the partial sums
sums converge to f uniformly, converges to f,  as n goes to infinity on S. So if I have a sequence of functions, each one bounded by some number M sub j, positive number, and, or
or non-negative number, at least, and the series involving the M sub j's R is convergent, then the series of the f sub j's converges uniformly.  OK, that's a conclusion. So in our example of that continuous, nowhere
differentiable functions, each of these f sub j's, cosine of 1, 60, j, x over 4 to the j.  we can combine all of what we've done so far to state the following, function f of x equals sum from j equals 1 to infinity, and I can make it something
else, but let's say sine of 40k over 2 to the k, x is continuous on, let's say, 0  1, for no, or I could say on R. Why is that? Each of these f sub, and I'm really puttering this, trying to go fast, each of these functions, this is 2 to the j, not 2, each of these functions  1 over 2 to the j, and 1 over 2 to the j is sumable. So then by this theorem, this convergence, so this function here, is the uniform limit of the partial sums, the partial sums are just a finite sum involving sine, so they're continuous functions. So f is the uniform limit of continuous
function, and is therefore continuous.  So we could have used this theorem to prove that that function we looked at back in
differentiability was continuous, but we didn't have uniform convergence and all that back then, so we just proved it by hand.  OK, so 1, so let's prove this quickly. So 1 follows from, what does it follow? It follows from the assumption a, b in the comparison test.  f sub j of x is bounded by M sub j and M sub j is sumable, this series converges. So by the comparison test, the sum with absolute values here for each fixed x converges, and that's
absolute convergence.  So let epsilon be positive, since this sum converges, there exists an M, a natural number, so that, remember, we have this Cauchy criterion  well, I guess we don't have to have, so that what sum from n equals m plus 1, the infinity of m sub j, which is equal to,  I chose a poor, I chose a poor letter, so this M here should not, let's change this to an n. So this is less than epsilon. So the point is that the tail is small, the sum from j equals n plus 1 to infinity of m sub j is less than epsilon.  then for all n bigger than or equal to this capital n, for all x in S, if I look at the limit, which is f of x, this is
some of the series minus sum from j equals 1 to n, this is equal to, now, f of x is equal to the whole sum, so minus is first part, this is equal to sum from j equals n plus 1 to infinity of f sub j  And by the triangle inequality, which does hold for a convergent
series, this is less than or equal to sum from j equals n plus 1 to infinity of f sub j of x  And by assumption a, this is less than or equal to sum from j equals n plus 1 to infinity of m sub j. And since n is bigger than or equal to capital n, I have this is less than or equal to sum from j equals capital M plus 1 to infinity of m sub j. And this thing, we chose capital M so that that's less  epsilon, and that's the end. So we chose, again, this n was chosen, depending only on this series, it didn't depend on any x at the point x and S. So I had to go through that kind of quickly because I'm up against the time crunch, but the point is for this theorem is that if I have a sequence of functions that are bounded by these  numbers m sub j, so this is, I was going so fast that n even label it correctly, this is
called the by-or-strass M test, M because you see M here. If I have a sequence of functions bounded by some numbers, m sub j, and those m sub j's are sumable, then what it says is that the series of the functions  Alright, so we'll stop there.