 OK, so we're going to continue with our discussion of the derivative.  So let I be an interval, meaning it could be open closed, it could go out to plus infinity, it could go out to
minus infinity, but you know what an interval is, and let's take a function from that interval to R. So we say f is differentiable at a point c and I, if this limit of f of x minus f of c over x minus c, this difference quotient, if this limit exists,  at this limit exists, we also denote it by f
prime of c. And last time we showed that we gave a simple example that, last time, that if f of x equals alpha times x to the n, then this function is differentiable at every c, and its derivative is equal to n times alpha x  the n minus 1. Now, let's state this in an equivalent way using sequences. Remember, we had this characterization of limits of functions, and the function we're looking at is f of x minus f of c over x minus c.  is from last time, from last time, that the limit, as let's say, g of x as x goes to c equals L, if and only if for every
sequence x sub n converging to c, g of x sub n converges to L as n goes to infinity. So we can restate what it means for a function to be differentiable at a point, and it's derivative to be L, say, if and only if for every sequence x sub n  with x sub n not equal to c for all n, and converging to c, we have that L is equal to this
limit as n goes to infinity of now this sequence of numbers f of xn minus f of c over x sub n minus c.  The theme of today is the connection between
differentiability and continuity, and continuity. And we have a very easy implication, which is that if a function is differentiable at a point, then it must be continuous at that point. So that's a statement of this theorem, if f going from an interval to R is different, will it c, then f is also continuous at c.  So let me also add in here that continuity at the point c in an interval is equivalent to saying that the limit as x goes to c of f of x equals f of c. Now, this is just a subtle point that I want to make is that for an interval,
or an open closed, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1,  point in that interval is a cluster point of that interval. And therefore, this definition I made up there is
actually meaningful and for continuity, something being continuous at c is equivalent to, if c is a cluster point, which I just said it is, it's always is, this limit equals the function evaluated at the point.  So how do we prove this? We write the limit as x goes to c of f of x in this way. So essentially, what I do is I add and subtract f of c, and then the part that is f of x minus f of c, I multiply by x minus c and
divide by x minus c, which is perfectly fine  because remember, for a limit, I'm never actually looking at
points where x equals c. So that's fine. And so I get this expression here. Now, what we know about limits is that the limit of the sum is the sum of the limits, as long as all these limits exist, and the limit of the product is a product of the limits, assuming all of these limits  And the limit as x goes to c of everything you see here do exist. So as x goes to c, this thing in brackets, or in, I guess these are brackets, I don't know what those are called, this limit here is f prime of c, as x goes to c of x minus c, that's just 0, and f of c is just a constant, there's nothing changing with x, so the limit  a constant is that constant, so I just get f of c. So the limit of this whole expression is f
prime of c times 0 plus f of c, which equals f of c. So we've just proven that the limit as x goes to c of f of x is equal to f of c, which is what we wish to prove.  beginning that students, we're learning proofs, but we're also
learning questions, what types of questions to ask. And whenever you come across a new theorem that has one implication, one hypothesis, one conclusion, then you should ask yourself, does the converse hold, does the conclusion also imply the hypothesis?  is achievable at c implies f is continuous at c. So it does the converse hold, namely if f is continuous at a point, does this imply that f is
differentiable at that point? And as you can see already there, the answer is no. I think you've probably covered this in calculus, but what's the function that gives this counter example that is continuous at c, but not  for example, c equals 0, and let's look at the function f of x equals the
absolute value of x. Then this function here, this is continuous at every point, so in particular, at c equals 0, but it's not differentiable at c equals 0. And how do you do that?  quotient does not have a limit as n goes to infinity. So that's what we'll do here is we'll find a
sequence x sub n with x sub n not equal to 0 for all n converging to 0 such that this limit does not exist. And rather than write that, because the limit does not exist, it doesn't make really sense for me to even write that, let me write this as saying  as the sequence is divergent. Now, how are we going to come up with a sequence x sub n so that the
difference quotient does not converge? Well, what's the logic? So for f of x equals the absolute value of x,  it looks like this, it looks like x, it's equal to x over here, minus x over here, so if you were to
formically differentiate, well, I mean, you could actually differentiate to the left of 0, you get the derivative is equal to minus 1, to the right, the derivative is 1, so that kind of suggests maybe there's some funny business going on at 0.  that a sequence which alternates between being negative and positive, but is converging to 0 and c if that sequence will
provide us with this desired sequence, which results in the difference quotient being divergent. So let's just take a guess, let xn be minus 1 to the n over n, it doesn't have to be this one, just something that
alternates back and forth would be enough,  and squared here or 2n or n to the 2020, whatever you like, then this is clearly
always non-zero and it converges to 0. And of course, y it converges to 0. I mean, you could prove this by epsilon m definition, but also, if I take the absolute value  less than or equal to 1 over n, and this one we know converges to 0, 0, so by squeeze theorem, the thing in the
thing in the middle must converge to 0, and we're done. So we have this sequence, x sub n equals minus 1 to the n over n, which is alternating back and forth, and we hope it's going to result in this difference quotient being divergent  as n goes to infinity, and so we compute that, let's look at the difference
quotion, f of x sub n minus f of 0, f of 0 is just 0, so I just get f of x sub n, which is the absolute value of minus 1 to the n over n over n, over x sub n, which is minus 1 to the n over n.  minus 1 to the n over n, which equals minus 1 to the minus n, but minus 1 to the minus n, this is equal to the
the same thing as minus 1 to the n. So this sequence here of difference quotient, so f of xn minus f of 0 or xn minus 0, this is just equal to the sequence minus 1 to the n,  which we know is divergent, it doesn't have a limit, that's one of the first examples of a
sequence we proved does not converge. So in summary, this function f of x equals the absolute value of x is continuous at c equals 0, but not
differentiable at c equals 0.  continuous at a point does not necessarily imply that it's
differentiable. But let's take a function which is continuous on the real number line, is there a point where it's differentiable? So it's already on the board, but this is not completely a crazy question to ask.  points where this function is differentiable, is differentiable for c positive and c positive, and
negative. So for this continuous function, there does exist points where it's differentiable. And you can imagine trying to draw any kind of curve that you can on a piece of paper, and you can probably find a point on that curve that has a tangent.  I imagine this is why people thought this was the case that a continuous
function has to have at least one point where it's differentiable. And Varustross, the godfather of analysis said no, he came up with a whole class of examples of functions, which are continuous on the real number line, but are differentiable nowhere.  instead of examples and result to the community, and to me, it's also one of the few results in this class that you really didn't see in your calculus class.  and do it now. And so what we're going to prove is, so we're going to
construct a function which is continuous everywhere, but is differentiable nowhere, so a continuous nowhere,  And I'll even write down the function for you, so what's the idea that the
veyor-strass had? I'm not going to write down the function just yet, but the idea of constructing such a function is that it should be highly oscillatory. Imagine, again, you're trying to draw a picture of the graph of a function that's nowhere different, you would
start to sit there and break your pencil trying to draw just  highly oscillating function so that it never has a tangent. And that's his idea is to build a function which is
highly oscillatory, but not two oscillatory so that it's still continuous at every point.  OK, so to start with the construction of this function, which is continuous, but nowhere
differential, we're going to need a few simple facts to start off with.  So again, let me write out state our goal, we're going to
construct a continuous function from R to R, which is nowhere differentiable.  in no point. So let's start off with a few simple facts about, so I said that we're going to build a function which is oscillating quite a lot.  those are going to be our building blocks, we'll choose one of them, let's choose cosine say as to be our building block, but anyway, so let's start off with some
elementary facts about cosine.  y, and the second is that for every real number c, and for all k, natural number, there exists a y, and c plus pi over k, c plus 3 pi over k  such that, and let me label this as theorem 1, such that cosine of kc, that's minus cosine of ky is greater than or equal to 1.  So both of these are simple facts about cosine. Really, this one just follows from the angle sum formula, this one follows from the
periodicity of cosine, so why are these true? So first off, we did prove, and maybe I should have used sine instead of cosine and all of this,  from our continuity section, we proved that for all x and y, sine x minus sine y is less than or equal to the absolute
value of x minus y for all x and y. And there is a simple relation between cosine x and sine of something, and that's just a shift by pi over 2,  then cosine of x minus cosine of y, this is equal to sine x plus pi over 2, minus sine y plus pi over 2. And if you like, let me instead of
using x and y here, let me use a and b. So then this is less than or equal  x plus pi over 2 minus y plus pi over 2, using this inequality. So that proves number 1, for number 2, is just a simple fact about cosine being a two-pipe
periodic.  function g of x equals cosine k of x, this is also periodic, but now what's the
period it's 2 pi over k?  a 3 pi over k. Thus, if I look at the image of
  OK, then so this function g of x equals cosine k of x, if I look at the
image of this interval, this will contain all of the real numbers between minus 1 and 1  So this is a interval of length 2 pi over k. cosine kx is 2 pi over k periodic, so I should get everything
between minus 1 and 1, except possibly the value at the endpoints. So take away, and the value at the endpoints is minus cosine kc,  because cosine of k times c plus pi is equal to pi over k is equal to cosine of k c plus pi, and cosine of something plus pi is
equal to minus cosine of that thing.  between minus 1 and 1, except for possibly the endpoint, this really only
harpens at cosine of k times c equals 1, so OK.  then if cosine of k c is bigger than or equal to 0, then we choose y n, this interval c plus  over k, c plus 3 pi over k. So if this thing is bigger than or equal to 0, then we choose y  So I'm not confusing myself. So this is simpler. We choose y in this interval so that cosine of k y equals minus 1, and if cosine kc is less than 0, then we choose  y so that cosine of k y equals 1. So again, just to get an idea, so I'm equivalent over a minor point, the fact that we have to take away
possibly the point where  possibly the value of cosine kc. Anyways, let's erase this for a minute, and let's imagine that the range of this guy, I mean, it's a 2 pi over k
periodic interval, so this should basically cover all values between minus 1 and 1. So cosine of kc will either be plus or minus, so if it's non-negative, then I can find a y in this interval, since it's 2 pi over k
periodic, so that cosine of k y equals minus 1,  And since this is non-negative, and this is equal to minus 1, the difference between these two and absolute value
will be greater than or equal to 1. Now, if cosine of kc is less than 0, then, again, since this interval contains minus 1 to 1, it's 2 pi over k, which is a y, so that cosine of k y equals 1.  a negative and 1 is greater than or equal to 1. And that's the proof. I made a kind of a mess of it, but this is very easy to understand if you just draw a picture, really.  And again, what these two parts of this theorem say is that cosine can be quite oscillatory if you insert a k here, because the difference between this interval is actually quite small. The length of this interval is 2 pi over k. If k is very large, that's a very small interval, yet somehow we can find two
point, which differ by at least 1 in value  if we plug them into the function. But cosine is not too wild because it satisfies this bound. So there are going to be the
ingredients in that idea I said at the start that we're going to build a function which oscillates, which is quite oscillatory, but is not too oscillatory that it's still continuous.  cosine kx where k is going to be changing. So I'm going to need one more very simple fact, so this one I want to
meassup too much, which is the following, for all a, b, c, and r, the absolute value of a plus b plus c, this is bigger than or equal to the absolute value of a,  minus the absolute value of c. And the proof of this is just to use the
triangle inequality twice, we have the absolute value of a, this is equal to a plus b plus c minus b plus c, minus b plus c, and this is less than or equal to, by the triangle inequality, the absolute value of a plus b plus c plus c, plus the absolute value of minus  this times b plus c, but that minus goes away with the
absolute value, and then I use a triangle inequality, one more time here to get, and then if I subtract,  subtract this side over to the other side of this
inequality, I get the statement of the theorem.  So first, I have a following claim for all x in R, the series given by sum from n equals 0 to infinity, and instead of
n-amany use k, cosine 160k, so here's our very oscillatory guy over 4 to the k  is absolutely convergent. So for each x and R, this series converges absolutely, so it's
spits out a real number, so I can define a function in terms of this series, let f from R to R be defined by f  f prime, f of x is just the number that I get, and I stick in x to this series, which is meaningful because for all x, this
series converges absolutely, so this is just a function, I put in x, I get out a real number, then the claim  f is bounded and continuous. So this is going to be our function which is continuous, but nowhere
differentiable. As you can see, it's built out of a bunch of very oscillatory functions, cosine of 160kx, this is just a really big number here, and as I said,  when we're talking about this theorem here, each one of those pieces is a very
assolatory on a very small interval, it oscillates between two values that differ by at least 1.  on arbitrarily small intervals, and therefore,
will not be differentiable.  is less than or equal to because cosine of no matter what you
plug n is bounded by 1, this is always bounded by 1 over 4 to the k. And therefore, by the comparison principle, we get that this series is convergent,  the original series is absolutely convergent. So each of these is bounded by 1 over 4 to the k, this series converges, this is a geometric series, therefore, by the comparison
of the series converges. So now we have this function defined by this series, this is not a power series, because a power series  cosine of x, or number times x, so let's show it's bounded, the same proof, actually, that we
gave here shows that x, b in R, then f of x equals this is equal to  the limit as m goes to infinity of this sum, and now for absolute values, this limit
poles out whenever the limit exists,  the limit of the absolute value equals the absolute
value of the limit, and this is less than or equal to the limit as m goes to infinity of bringing the f's, so by the triangle inequality, this is just a finite sum, so I can bring the absolute values  k equals 0 to m, cosine 1, 60k, x over 4 to the k, absolute value, and this is less than or equal to
limit as m goes to infinity, sum k equals 0 to m, 4 to the minus k, again, cosine of anything is bounded by 1, and this equals  1, 4, 3rd, this is just a sum from k equals 0 to infinity
of 4 to the minus k. So this function is always bounded by 4, 3rd.  To show a function's continuous, remember, we have that other characterization of
continuity that a function's continuous at a point if and only if for every sequence converging to that point, f of xn converges to f of c.  and let xn be a sequence converging to c. So what we want to show is that limit as n goes to infinity of f of xn minus f of c in absolute
value equals 0. That's the same as saying the limit as n goes to infinity of f of xn equals f of c. Now, f is a bounded  function, so this sequence, f of xn minus f of c in absolute value is a bounded
sequence, so it has a limsup, and we did an exercise on the assignment that the limit of a sequence equals 0 if and only if the limsup equals 0.  Equivalently, we'll show that the limsup of f of x sub n minus f of c equals 0. This thing always exists for a bounded
sequence, which is one of the reasons which is what makes limsup useful, is that  I do always exist. So if we show that this limsup equals 0, then this is equivalent to showing this
limit equals 0. Again, this was an exercise or you can take it as the liminf of something that's non-negative is always bigger than or equal to 0. So if we show this is equal to 0, we would have 0 is less than or equal to the liminf of this thing is less than or equal to the limsup, which equals 0, and therefore, the liminf equals the liminf
equals the limsup equals 0.  that saying that this is equivalent to this. So we're going to show this, that the limsup of f of x sub n minus f of
f of c equals 0, but we don't, so that might be a little tough, but what we can show, and what we will show, is we'll give ourself a little room, we'll show that for all epsilon positive,  of f of x sub n minus f of c, which is a non-negative number, is less than epsilon. So this is a fixed number, not a negative number, which is always smaller than, put less than or equal to there, which is smaller than any number that I want, and therefore, it has to be 0.  So just to recap, we want to show we have a sequence converging to c, we want to show that f of xn converges to f of c. Another way of stating that is that this limit of the absolute value of the
difference between these two converges to 0, that's, again, an equivalent way of stating the limit,  And in another assignment, we proved that for a sequence of non-negative numbers, or if you like, just for a
sequence of numbers, it converges to 0 if and only if the limsup of the absolute value converges to 0, but this is a sequence of non-negative numbers, this absolute value of f of xn minus f of c, so this is equivalent to this.  the show is equivalent to this thing right below it. Now, rather than show directly that this limit limsup equals 0, we're going to show that for all epsilon positive, it's less than or equal to that small number. And therefore, proving that it's 0 because it's a non-negative number, smaller than every positive number. So this is our goal to show this limsup is less than epsilon.  So let epsilon be positive, we're now going to prove that that limsup is less than epsilon.  not be a natural number such that the sum from k equals M0 plus 1 to infinity
of 4 to the minus k is less than epsilon over 2. So this series here, this is a convergent series, if I go from k equals 0 to infinity. And we have this Cauchy criterion for convergent series, which  which can be equivalently stated as for all M0 and natural number, there exists, or for all epsilon, there exists, so first off, rather than go through all that, we can
actually just compute this, that the left-hand side equals 4 to the minus M0 minus 1,  times sum from l equals 0 to infinity, 4 to the minus L, which equals 4, 3, 4 to the minus M0, minus 1, which equals 1, 3, 4 to the minus M0. So if M0 is chosen very large, this is 4 to the minus M0, so this is, like I can write this as 1,  over 1, 4, and as long as M0 is chosen very large, I can always make this very small, that's the left side
over there, so I can always find M0 so that this is the case.  the limsup of f of xn minus f of x, we split this up into two
paces, this is equal to limsup of n of two parts, sum from k equals 0 to M0 of cosine of 160k, xn minus, so each of these  defined in terms of a sum, so I'm going to break the sum up into
up to M0 and then everything past M0, this is equal to 1 over 4k times cosine 160k, xn minus cosine 160k, plus sum from k equals 0 to M0 plus 1 to infinity, 1 over  or k same thing, absolute value. And now, we use a triangle inequality in the fact that limsupes preserve inequality, so the absolute value of this thing is less than or equal to the sum of the
absolute value  values, and the limsup of those sequences is less than or equal to the sum of the limsup, that was another
exercise from an assignment, or you did something similar with the liminf, so this is less than or equal to limsup. Now, I use the triangle inequality sum from k equals 0 to M0 for minus k, cosine 160k,  x sub n minus cosine 1, 1, 6, ck, c, c, c, c, c, c, c, c, c,
c, c, c, c, c, c,  And then same thing in these brackets here.  So we have that this limsup of x sub n minus f of c is less than or equal to the limsup of this
guy plus the limsup of this guy, and now I'm going to use the triangle inequality, again, bringing the absolute values inside of the sums, which is perfectly valid even for the infinite sum by the same argument I use, basically,  this is less than or equal to the limsup as n goes to infinity of
minus cosine of 160k c and sup plus limsup,  of sum from k equals M0 plus 1 to infinity of now the absolute value of the same thing.  Now, cosine of anything is always bounded by 1, so this is bounded by, first off, let me come back to this second one, M0 is fixed. Remember, this is not changing with n, it's just fixed, it's just
depended only on epsilon. So M0 is fixed, and this is less than or equal to limsup,  of n, now we use what we know about cosine, that cosine of something minus cosine
cossign of something else is bounded by the difference in the argument, so this is bounded by 4 to the minus k times 1, 60k, xn minus 1, 60kc, plus limsup  k equals M0 plus 1 to infinity, 4 minus k times 2, as this is bounded by 1, that's bounded by 1. Now, there's no n left here, so this is really just equal to that. And we chose M0 so that this quantity here is less than epsilon over 2, so times 2, this is less than epsilon.  So this is less than or equal to Ln sup, sum from k equals 0 to M0 of 40k. Now, again, this is just a fixed number.  times 4 to the minus k, that's 40k, and then we chose M0 so that this
quantity over here is less than epsilon. And now as n goes to infinity, x sub n is converging to c. So this thing here converges to 0 equals times 0 plus  epsilon equals epsilon. So to me, this is a real first proof of analysis, where you're using everything that you've been
exposed to up to this point to prove a really deep theorem. So go through this slowly, but there's not too much  the estimates are not all that tricky once you have them in front of you. So we've shown that for all epsilon, this limsup is less than or equal to epsilon, because
remember, we ended with epsilon here, but we started off estimating this limsup here.  we want to prove, and this is due to the
veyor straws, the function, which we've been studying, f of x equals sum from k equals 0 to infinity cosine 160k x over 4 to the k  is nowhere differentiable. So with everything we've done so far, so we know this function is continuous, we've proven that. So this theorem provides you with an example of a function which is continuous, but
no-where differentiable, and with  what we have on the board, namely, the key parts are going to be what's in that first theorem there, and this
triangle inequality we have over here, we'll be able to prove this.  I'm going to state theorem 2 from over there, because I need some space to write in a minute for all a, b, c, the absolute
value of a plus b plus c is bigger than or equal to a minus f of value of b, minus the absolute value of c.  So let me resummarize it already. What we've done up to this point, we've shown that this function here is well-defined, the series is
always absolutely convergent, and therefore, this function is bounded, and we also proved that it's bounded and continuous,  So this function is bounded and continuous, and we're going to prove it's
know where differentiable, and again, what's the idea, the idea is that we built it out of functions which are highly oscillatory at smaller and smaller scales. So somehow this function is highly oscillatory at every scale.  which is a function, which is a path, which is a highly oscillatory, then that function will not be
differentiable anywhere.  And when we looked at f of x equal the absolute value of x, we're going to
construct or find a sequence x sub n such that x sub n does not equal c for all n, xn converges to c, and the sequence f of x  minus f of c over x sub n minus c, in fact, is divergent, but we'll go even further, is unbounded. And therefore, the sequence cannot converge, and therefore, the function is not
not differentiable at c.  So we're going to use theorem 1 to find the sequence by theorem 1, namely part 2, for all n, a natural number, there exists a x sub n such that what x sub n is  interval of the form, so c plus pi over 160n is less than x is less than c plus 3 pi over 160n.  So if 160n, x sub n minus cosine of 160nc is bigger than or equal to 1. So let me call these two properties a and b.  is we could have instead written by subtracting c
across the board that x sub n minus c is between pi over 160n and 3 pi over 160n. So by a, for all n, x sub n does not equal to c, because their difference is bounded below by a positive number,  I mean, their difference is actually positive, and it's non-zero, so by the squeeze theorem, if you like, if you like,
putting the c on both sides, we get that x sub n converges to c. So this will be our sequence, our bad sequence for which the difference quotient  unbounded. So in fact, let me write this out a little bit more, and x sub n minus c, which is equal to x sub n minus c, because this is positive, is less than 3 pi over 1,  and this goes to 0, therefore, the absolute value of xn minus c
converges to 0, and therefore x sub n converges to c.  and 160k, x over 4 to the k. So f of x is equal to the sum, and k equal to 0 of fk of x.  of c over x sub n minus c. So now, find a lower bound on if I can find  a lower bound on this absolute value, which is getting large as
large as large as I wish, and that proves that this sequence is unbounded, and I'm done.  minus f of c, which is right this in a few different
ways, or not a few different ways, but let's split it up as a sum. So all of these guys are equal to sum of f sub k.  sub k, this is just one of these building blocks plus sum from k equals 0 to n minus 1 plus  put x here, I'm going to write c, and so I'm going to let a sub n be this first number, b sub n be the second number,
including the sum, and this will be c sub n.  equal to a sub n plus b sub n plus c sub n, and now I'm going to use that
triangle inequality I proved, then f of x sub n minus f of c is greater than or which is equal to a sub n plus b sub n plus c sub n plus c sub n is bigger than or equal to a sub  sub n minus b sub n minus c sub n. Now, a sub n, this is just a difference between these guys, this is bounded
below by 1, so it's kind of large, not 1, but 1 over 4 to the n. These other guys will prove a very small compare to the a sub n. And then this upper bound and 1, this upper bound on x sub n minus c will be the n in the  Our goal is now to estimate from below a sub n, remember we're trying to find a
fine a lower bound for this quantity over x sub n minus c. So we need to estimate these things from below, or this sum from below, that means we need to estimate this from below, and then b sub n and c sub n, since they have minus signs from above.  a sub n, which is equal to 4 to minus n cosine 1, 6d in x sub n minus cosine 1, 6d to the nc, this is, remember how we chose these x sub n's, this is bounded above by 1, or bounded below  by 1, so this is bigger than or equal to 4, 4 to the minus n. So that's a sub n. Now let's look at how big b sub n is. And we want to bound this from above, because when it hits the minus sign, this will flip the inequality and we'll have that this will be bounded
from below by something. So the absolute value of b sub n, that's equal  sum from k equals 0 to n minus 1 of fk of x sub n minus f of c, k of c, and bringing the absolute values inside by the triangle inequality, this is less than or equal to sum from k
equals n minus 1 of f of f of fk, x sub n minus  fk of c, and now, so this is equal to sum from k equals 0 to n minus 1, 4 to minus k, cosine 160k, x of n, minus cosine of 160k, c.  number 1, I'm sorry, there are 1 part 1, so this is theorem 1, 1, 1, the difference in these is bounded by 1, 60k times the
difference in those two, so that's  And now these things we can sum up in closed form, we'll actually x sub n minus c, we proved is less than 3 pi over 1, 60n.  Now, sum from k equals 0 to n minus 1, 40k, we use this formula for
summing a geometric sum, this is equal to, this is equal to, 40 to the n minus 1 over 39, which is less than,  So take away the 1, this is 1 over 13, 4 to minus n times pi. And that's less than pi is less than 4, so plus 1.  is less than or equal to 1 over 13, 4, so minus n plus 1.  value is less than or equal to, now we just do a
rhodol estimate, we bring the absolute values inside, so just as we had before with the b sub n's, except now we're summing from k equals n plus 1 to infinity, we've  And then let's use the triangle inequality on that. Remember, fk is equal to cosine of 1, 60k times x over 4 to the k.  And now this we can actually sum, this is equal to 4 to the minus n minus 1 times sum from L equals 0 to infinity of 4 to the minus L, and 1 is this equal to 2 times 4 to the minus
n is equal to
2 times 4 to the minus L  n minus 1 times 4, 3rds equals 2, 3rds, 4 to the minus n. So my board works getting a little shoty, but it'll be OK. i.e., we've proven that the absolute value of c sub n is bounded by 2, 3rds, 4 to the minus n.  So, combining everything that we've done, we've shown that f of x sub n minus f of c, which remember, is
equal is bounded below by,  this is bounded below by a sub n, remember, so the first box is bounded by 4 to the minus n. So first off, everything, the a sub n, b sub n, c sub n, they all have 4 to the minus n in a, and
volved, up into the minus S, for b, I'll cover it up, 4 to the minus n, so this is 1 coming from  the a sub n's and minus 4 over 13 coming from the b sub n's minus 2 thirds coming from the c sub n's.  So f of x sub n minus f of c is bounded from below by 4 to the minus n times 1 over 39. Now, I just divide by x sub n minus c, which is bounded above by 3 pi over 1, 60n.  take reciprocicles, I get that, I get the absolute value of f of x of n minus f of c over x
of n minus c is bounded from above by 1 over x sub n minus c times 4 to the minus n 1 over 39, which is bounded below by, by now inserting this estimate here,  n over, I think that's 1, 17, pi, say that, yes. And therefore, the absolute value of the difference quotient is bounded below by 40 to the n over some fixed number. And this thing on the right-hand side is unbounded as n gets as n
verries from 1 to infinity. And therefore, the absolute value  Now, you have this difference quotient is unbounded.  definitely haven't seen this, most likely, and really this is a first
result that involves a lot of math that we've covered up to this point to prove a very non-trivial and deep theorem that differentiability is a bit of a miracle, it's a miracle when it happens.  you