 The following content is provided under a Creative Commons license. Your support will help MIT OpenCourseWare continue to offer high-quality educational resources for free. To make a donation or to view additional materials from hundreds of MIT courses, visit MIT OpenCourseWare at ocw.mit.edu. OK, so today we have a new topic, and we're going to start to learn about vector fields,  integrals. So last week we've been doing double integrals. For today we just forget all of that, but don't actually forget it. Put it away in the corner of your mind. It's coming to come back next week. But what we do today, we're going to do line integrals, and these are completely different things. So it helps, actually, if you don't think of double integrals at all while doing line integrals. So, anyway, let's start with vector fields.  So that's a vector field. Well, a vector field is something that's of a form, well, it's a vector, but where m and n, the components, actually depend on x and y, on the point where you are. So there are functions of x and y.  So what that means concretely is that at every point in the plane, you have a vector. So in a con field at every where you have con, in a vector field, every where you have a vector. That's how it works. So a good example of a vector field, I don't know if you've seen these maps that show the wind.  let's, that's a picture of the wind patterns of a coast of California, with Santa Anna winds, in case you're wondering what's been going on recently. So you have all of these vectors that show you the velocity of the air, basically at every point. I mean, of course, you don't draw it at every point, because if you draw a vector at absolutely all the points of a plane, then you just fill up everything, and you wouldn't see anything. So you just choose points.  and you draw the vectors at those points. So here's another cool image of, so I'll take down, that's hurricane off the coast of Mexico with the winds spiraling around the hurricane. So, anyway, it's kind of hard to see, you don't really see all the vectors. Actually, I guess the auto focus is having trouble with it.  So I guess I will go back to the previous one. OK, so anyway, a vector field is something where, at each point, in the plane, we have a vector,  f, that depends on x and y. So this occurs in real life.  that's moving. And the example is first fields. So now, first fields are not something out of star wars. It's just, if you look at gravitational attraction, you know that if you have a mass somewhere, well, it will be attracted to fall down because of a gravity field of the earth, which means that at every point you have a vector that's pointing down. And, same thing in space, you have the gravitational field of planets, stars, and so on. So that's also an example of a vector field because, wherever you go,  you would have that vector and what it is depends on where you are. So, the examples from the real world are things like velocity in a fluid or a force field where you have a force that depends on the point where you are.  the vector fields mathematically, so we won't really care what they are most of the time, but as we'll explore with them, define quantities and so on, will very often use these motivations to justify why we would care about certain quantities. OK, so the first thing we have to figure out is how do we draw a vector field? How do you generate a plot like that?  let's practice drawing a few vector fields.  to the right, one up, and I just put that vector everywhere. OK, so you know. You just put it at a few points all over the place, and when you think you have enough so that you understand what's going on, then you stop. So here, probably, we don't need that many. I mean, here, I think we get the picture. OK? So everywhere, we have a vector, 2, 1.  Now, let's try to look at slightly more interesting examples. OK, let's say I give you a vector field x times i hat. OK, so there's no j component. So how would you draw that? Maybe I don't need that much.  OK, we know that this guy is only in the I direction. So it's always horizontal. It doesn't have a j component. So everywhere it would be a horizontal vector. Now, the question is, how long is it? Well, how long it is depends on x. So for example, if x is 0, then this will be actually the 0 vector. So x is 0, that's here. See, on the y axis, maybe I should take a different corner.  I actually have the 0-vector. Now, if x becomes positive, small, then I will have actually a small positive multiple of i, so I will be going a little bit to the right. And then if I increase x, then this guy becomes larger, so I get a longer vector to the right, if x is negative, then my vector field points to the left instead.  it looks something like that. Any questions about that picture? OK, so usually we're not going to try to have, you know, very accurate. We won't actually take time to plot a vector field very carefully. If we need two, computers can do it for us.  what the vector field does roughly. Whether it's getting larger and larger, in what direction, it's pointing, what are the general features. So just to do a couple more, and actually you'll see very quickly that the examples I take in lecture are pretty much always the same ones. So we'll be playing a lot with these particular vector fields, just because they're in good examples.  So let's say I give you xi plus yj. So that one has an interesting geometric significance. If I take a point xy, there I want to take the vector xy. How do I do that? Well, it's the same as the vector from the origin to this point. So I take this vector and I copy it so that it starts at my given point.  So it looks like that. And you know, same thing at every point. So it's a vector field that's pointing radially away from the origin. And its magnitude increases with distance from the origin. So you don't have to draw, you know,  as many as me. So the idea is this vector field, everywhere, points, away from the origin, and its magnitude is equal to the distance from the origin. So, you know, if this were, for example, the velocity fields, well, that would tell you, you would see visually what's happening to your fluid. Like, here, maybe you have a source at the origin that's pearing fluid out, and it's flowing all the way away from that.  OK, let's do just a last one. Let's say I give you minus y comma x. What does that look like? That's an interesting one, actually. It's a nice one. So let's see.  xy here. So this vector here is x comma y, but the vector I want is negative y comma x. So what does that look like compared to? Yeah, it's perpendicular to the position to this vector. If I rotate this vector, so let me maybe draw a picture on the side, if I take the vector xy, then the vector with components negative, which is less than x  y and x is going to be like this, it's the vector that I get by rotating by 90-degrees counterclockwise. And, of course, I don't want to put that vector at the origin.  here, it would be like that, like that. And if I'm closer to the origin, then it looks a bit of the same, but it's shorter. And at the origin, it's 0. And when I'm further away, it becomes even larger. So, see, this vector field, if it was the motion of the fluid, it would correspond to the origin of the  to a fluid that's just going around the origin in circles, rotating at uniform speed. OK, so this is actually the velocity field for uniform rotation. And if you figure out, you know, how long does it take for a particular field?  So we'll show it to go all the way around. Well, that will be actually 2 pi, because the length of a circle is 2 pi times the radius. So that's actually at unit angular velocity, 1 gradient per second, or per unit time. OK, so that's why this guy comes up quite a lot in real life.  So you can imagine lots of variations on these. Of course, you can also imagine vector fields given by much more complicated formulas, and then you'll have a hard time drawing them. So maybe you'll use a computer, or maybe you'll just give up and just do whatever calculation you have to do without trying to visualize a vector field. But if you have a nice simple one, then it's worth doing it because sometimes it will give you insight about what we're going to compute next. OK, any questions first about these pictures?  n is less than y.  then y is positive and x is 0. So if I take y negative x, I get a positive first component and 0 for the second one. So y comma negative x would be a rotation at unit speed in the opposite direction. OK? So, yeah, and there's a lot of tweaks you can do to it. So if you flip the signs, you get rotation in the other direction. Yes?  So you need that angle of R. How do I know that it's at unit angular velocity? Well, that's because if my angular velocity is 1, then that means that the actual speed is equal to the distance from the origin. Right? Because the length, I mean, the arc length on the circle of the certain radius is equal to the radius times the angle. So if the angle varies at rate 1, then I travel at speed equal to the radius. And that's what I do here.  the length of this vector is equal to the distance from the origin. I mean, it's not obvious on the picture, but really, the vector that I put here is the same as this vector rotated, so it has the same length. So that's why the angular velocity is one. It doesn't really matter how much, anyway, but. OK. So now, what are we going to do with vector fields?  of things, but let's start somewhere. So one thing you might want to do with a vector field is, so I'm going to think for now of the situation where we have a force. So if you have a force exerted on a particle, and that particle moves on some trajectory, then probably you've seen it.  physics that the work done by the force corresponds to the first dot product with the displacement vector, how much you have moved your particle. And, of course, if you do just a straight line trajectory or if the force is constant, that works well. But if you're moving on a complicated trajectory and the first keeps changing, then actually you want to integrate that over time.  So we are going to, the first thing we'll do is learn how to compute the work done by your vector field. And, mathematically, that's called a line integral. So, physically, remember, the work done by your force is the first times the distance.  is actually the dot product between the first as a vector, and the displacement vector for a small motion. So say that your point is moving from here to here, you have the displacement delta R. That's just the change in the position vector. Give us the vector from the old position to the new position. And then you have your first that's being exerted.  between them, and that will give you the work of the force during this motion. And the physical significance of this, well, the work tells you basically how much energy you have to provide to actually perform this motion. OK, just in case you haven't seen this in 8-0-1 yet, I'm hoping all of you have heard about work somewhere. But in case it's completely mysterious, that's the amount of energy you have to provide, sorry, actually no, that's the amount of energy provided by the force.  So if the first goes along the motion, it actually pushes the particle. It provides energy to it to do that motion. And conversely, if you're trying to go against the force, then you have to provide energy to the particle to be able to do that. So in particular, the work, this is the only force that's taking place, then the work will be the variation in kinetic energy of the particle along the motion. So now, that's a good description for a small motion.  but let's say that my particle is not just doing that, but it's doing something complicated. And my force keeps changing. So somehow, maybe I have a different force at every point. So then I want to find the total work done along the motion. Well, what I have to do is I have to cut my trajectory into these little pieces. And for each of them, I have a vector along the trajectory,  I have the force, I do the dot product, and I sum them together. And, of course, the actual answer, well, to get the actual answer, I should actually cut into smaller and smaller pieces and sum all of the small contributions to work. So, in fact, it's going to be an integral. So, along some trajectory,  So let's call c the trajectory for curve.  an integral along c of f dot dl. So we have to decode this notation. So one way to decode this is to say it's a limit as we cut into smaller and smaller pieces of the sum of our each piece of the trajectory of the first at the given point.  dot product with that small vector along with trajectory. And well, that's not how we're into compute it. To compute it, we do things differently. So how can we actually compute it? Well, what we can do is say that actually we are cutting things into,  small time intervals, so the way that we split our trajectory is we just take a picture, every, say, millisecond. So every millisecond we have a new position. And the motion, the amount by which you have moved during each small time interval, is basically the velocity vector times the amount of time. So, in fact, let me just rewrite this.  as you know you do the dot product between the force, and how much you have moved. Well, if I just write it this way, no things happened, but what this thing is, actually, is the velocity vector, dr dt. So what I'm trying to say is that,  I can actually compute my integral by integrating f.product with dr dt over time, from time, whatever the initial time to whatever the final time is, I integrate f.product velocity dt. And of course, here when I say f, I mean,  at the point on the trajectory at time t. This guy depends on x and y, therefore it depends on the t. OK, I see a lot of confused faces. So let's do an example, and then I will ask you. OK. So now, yes, that would be probably, so here I need to put a limit as delta t tends to 0.  I get my trajectory into smaller and smaller time intervals. For each time interval, I have a small motion, which is essentially velocity times delta t, and then I dot that with a force. And I sum them. OK, so let's do an example. Let's say that we want to find the work of this force. So I guess that's the last example that we had.  So it's a first field that tries to make everything in the right, somehow, your first points along these circles. And let's say that our trajectory, our particle is moving along the parametric curve, x equals y equals t squared for t going from 0 to 1. OK, so what that looks like, well, maybe I should draw in your picture,  So our vector field, or whatever, and our trajectory, if you try to plot this, when you see y is actually x squared, so it's a piece of parabola that goes from the origin to 1 1. OK, that's what our curve looks like.  are far along this trajectory. I should point out, I mean, you know, if you're asking me, how did you get this? That's actually the wrong question. I didn't, you know, this is all part of the data. I have a force, and I have a trajectory, and I want to find what's the work done along that trajectory. These two guys, I can choose completely independently of each other. So the integral along c of f.d r,  will be, well, it's the integral from time 0 to time 1 of f that the velocity vector, dRdT, dT. So that will be the integral from 0 to 1 of, OK, let's try to figure it out. So what is f? f at a point xy is minus y,  x will come as x, but if I take the point where I am at time t, then x is t and y is t squared. So here I plug x equals t, y equals t squared, that will give me negative t squared and t. So here I will put negative t squared, t, dot product. What is the velocity vector? Well, dx dt is just 1.  dt is 2t, so the velocity vector is 1 and 2t. dt. So now we have to continue calculation. We get integral from 0 to 1 of what is this dot product. Well, it's negative t squared plus 2t squared. I get t squared. Well, maybe I'll write it.  plus 2t squared dt, that ends up being integral from 0 to 1 of t squared dt, which you all know how to integrate and get one-third. So that's the work done by the force along this curve. Yes? Why did you get that negative square plus 2t squared over the end? Well, I got it by just taking the dot product between the force and the velocity.  So in case you're wondering, things go like this. OK, any questions on how we did this calculation?  do every other dR, well, soon we'll be able to. We don't know yet what dR means or how to use it as a symbol. OK? Because we haven't said yet. I mean, see, this is a d vector R. That's kind of a strange thing to have. And certainly R is not a useful variable. We have to be careful about what are the rules, what does this symbol mean. So we're going to see that right now. And then we can do it, actually, in the lecture  in a slightly more efficient way. But you can't just use, I mean, R is not a scalar quantity. R is a position vector. So you can't integrate f with respect to R. We don't know how to do that. OK. So, oh, yes, sorry. I can't see people up there because of the spotlights, but yes. If I were to do,  So I still can't hear you. Sorry. OK, so the question is, if I took a different trajectory from the origin to that 0.1, 1, what will happen? Well, the answer is I would get something different. OK, so for example, let me try to convince you of it. For example, say that I chose to instead go like this and then around like that.  that, then, first, I wouldn't do any work, because here, the force is perpendicular to my M0. And then I would be going against the force all the way around, so I should get something that's negative. Even if you don't see that, just, except at face value, what I'm going to say now, the value of a line integral, in general, depends on how we got from point A to point B. And that's why we have to compute it by using the parametric equation for the curve.  what curve you choose. OK, any other questions? Oh, yes? So, yes, what happens when we're first in flags the trajectory? Well, then actually, you'd have to solve a differential equation, telling you how the particle moves.  to find what the trajectory is. So that's something that would, you know, be a very useful topic, and that's probably more like what you will do in 18.03, although maybe you actually know how to do it in this case. So what we're trying to develop here is a method to figure out if we know what the trajectory is, what the work will be. It doesn't tell us what the trajectory will be. But, of course, we could also find that. But here, see, I'm not assuming, for example, that the part  The particle is moving just based on that force. Maybe actually I'm here to hold it in my hand and force it to go where it's going. Or maybe there's some rail that's taking it on that trajectory or whatever. So I can really do it along any trajectory. And if I wanted to, if I knew that it's the case, then I could try to find the trajectory based on what the force is.  Next. OK, so let's try to make sense. When you asked a while ago, just a few minutes ago, what can we do directly with dr? So drc becomes somehow a vector. I mean, when I replace it by dr dt times dt, it becomes something that's a vector, but with dt next to it.  well, it's not really new, but let's see. Another way to do it. Let's say that our first has components M and N. I claim that we can write symbolically,  kind of a vector. I mean, it's not a real vector, of course, but as a notation, it's a pretty good notation, because it tells us that f.dr is m dx plus n dy. And so, in fact, we'll very often write, instead of f.dr, 9 integral long c, we'll write for 9 integral long c of m dx.  plus n d y. And so in this language, of course, what we are integrating now, rather than a vector field, becomes a differential. But you should think of the two as being pretty much the same thing. It's like when you compare the gradient of a function and it's differential. They're different notations, but they have the same content. OK, so now, there still remains the question, how do we compute this kind of integral? Because it's more subtle than the notation suggests.  because m and n both depend on x and y. And if you just integrated with respect to x, you'd be left with y is in there, and you don't want to be left with y. You want a number at the end. And see, the catch is along with the curve, x and y are actually related to each other. So, whenever we write this, we have two variables x and y, but in fact, along with a curve c, we have only one parameter.  could be time, whatever you want. But we have to actually express everything in terms of that one parameter, and then we get a youthful, single-valuable integral. So how do we evaluate things in this language? Well, we do it by substituting a parameter into everything.  OK, so the method to evaluate is to x plus 1.  x and y in terms of a single variable, and then substitute that variable. So let's, for example, redo the one we had up there, just using these new notations.  in that example that we had, our vector field f was negative y comma x. So what we are integrating is negative y dx plus x dy. OK? And see if we have just this, we don't know how to integrate that.  negative xy or something like that, but that actually doesn't make sense. It doesn't work. So what we'll do is we'll actually have to express everything in terms of a same variable, because it's a single integral. We should have only one variable. And what that variable will be, well, if we just do it the same way, that would just be t.  So how do we express everything in terms of t? Well, we use the power-entry equation. We know that x is t, and y is t squared. OK? So we know what to do with these two guys. What about dx and dy? Well, it's easy. We just differentiate. dx becomes dt. dy becomes 2t dt.  I'm just saying in a different language what I said over there with dx dt equals 1, d y dt equals 2t. It's the same thing, but written slightly differently. So now, so I'm going to do it again. I'm going to switch from one board to the next one. My integral becomes the integral over c of negative y is minus t squared dt plus 1.  x is t times d y is 2t dt. And now that I have only t left, it's fine to say, oh, I have a usual single-variable integral of a variable, t, that goes from 0 to 1. So now I can say, yes, this is the integral from 0 to 1 of that stuff, well, I can simplify a bit, becomes just t squared dt.  And I can compute it. I have negative t squared, and then I have plus 2t squared. So I end up with positive t squared. OK, it's the same as up there. OK, any questions? Yes?  d y, d y is the derivative of y, it's the different role of y. y is T squared, so I get 2T dT. So I plug dT for dx, I plug 2T dT for dy and so on. And that's the general method. So if you are given a curve, then you first have to figure out how do you express x and y in terms of the same thing. And you get to choose, in general, what parameter will you like?  choose, you choose to parameterize your curve in whatever way you want. So the note that I want to make is that this line integral depends on the trajectory,  but not on the parameterization. So you can choose whichever variable you want. So for example, what you could do is, when you know that you have that trajectory, you could also choose to parameterize it as x equals, say, I don't know, x equals sine theta,  y equals sine square theta, because y is x squared, where theta goes from 0 to pi over 2. And then you could get dx and dy in terms of d theta, and you'd be able to do it with a lot of trig, and you would get the same answer. So that would be a harder way to get the same thing. OK, so what you should do in practice is use the most reasonable way to parameterize your curve.  If you know that here, you have a piece of power, well, y equals x squared. There's no way you will put sine and sine squared. You could set x equals t, y equals t squared, is very reasonable. You can even take a small shortcut and say that your variable will be just x. So that means x, you just keep it as it is. And then when you have y, you set y equals x squared, d y equals 2x dx, and then you have an integral of our x. That works.  This one is not practical, but you get to choose.  So now let me tell you a bit more about the geometric. So we've said, here's how we computed it in general. And that's the general method for computing a line integral for work.  always do this, try to find a parameter, the simplest one, express everything in terms of that variable, and then you have an integral to compute. But sometimes you can actually say a lot of work by just thinking geometrically about what this all does. OK, so let me tell you about the geometric approach. So one thing I want to remind me is that, in fact,  of first is what is this vector dR? Well, what is vector delta R? If I take a very small piece of a trajectory, then my vector delta R will be tangent to the trajectory. So it will be going in the same direction as the unit tangent vector, T. And what is its length? Well, its length is the arc length along with trajectory,  which is what we called delta S. And where S was distance along the trajectory. So we can write vector dr. So we say that dx comma dy. But that's also tea times ds. It's a vector whose direction is tangent to the curve, and whose length element is actually the arc length element.  I mean, if you don't like this notation, think about, divide everything by dt. Then what we're saying is dR dt, but it's a velocity vector, well, it coordinates the velocity vector is dX dt, dY dt. But more geometrically, the direction of a velocity vector is tangent to the trajectory, and its magnitude is speed.  dS dt. So that's really the same thing. So if I say this, that means that my line integral, after d R, well, I say that I can write it as integral of m d x plus n d y.  actually computed by computing the integral. But if in study, I want to think about it, geometrically, I could rewrite it as f.t ds. So now you can think of this. You know, f.t is a scalar quantity. It's the tangent component of my force. So I take my force and I project it to the tangent direction, to the trajectory. And then I integrate that along with the curve.  it's still the same thing. And sometimes it's easier to do it this way. So here's an example. Let's say, so this is bound to be easier only when the field and the curve are relatively simple and have a geometric relation to each other. If I give you an evil formula with x cubed plus y to the fifth or whatever, there's very little chance that you will be able to simplify it that way.  let's say that I'm doing, say, my trajectory is just a circle of radius A, centered at the origin. Let's say I'm doing that counterclockwise. And let's say that my vector field is xi plus yj. OK, so what does that look like?  So, well, so my trajectory is just this circle. My vector field, remember xi plus y j, that's the one that's pointing, radially, from the origin. So, hopefully, if you have good physics intuition here, you already know what the work is going to be. Right? It's going to be 0, because the force is perpendicular to the motion.  Now we can say it directly by saying, well, if we take any point of the circle, so you know, if you have any point of the circle, then the tangent vector to the circle will be tangent, well, it's tangent to the circle. So that means it's perpendicular to the radial direction, while the force is pointing in the radial direction.  So you have a right angle between them. So f is definitely clear to t. So f that is 0, and the line integral of f that ds is just 0. See, if it's much easier than writing, well, this is integral of x dx plus y dy.  x equals a cosine theta, y equals a sine theta, we get a bunch of trick things,  negative yi plus xj. So that means, along my circle, the tangent vector goes like this. And my vector field is also going around. So, in fact, at this point, the vector field,  will also be going in the same direction. So now f is actually parallel to the tension in the direction. So that means that the dot product f dot t, remember that's the component of f in this direction, that will be the same as the length of f. Right? But what's the length of f on this circle?  if this radius is A. It's just going to be A. That's what we said earlier about this vector field. So at every point, this dot product is A. Now we know how to integrate that quite quickly.  we can take it out. And now, what do we get when we integrate ds along c? Well, we should get the total length of the curve. If we sum all the little pieces of arc length, but we know that the length of the circle of radius a is 2 pi a, so we get 2 pi a squared. If we were to compute that by hand, well, what would we want to show?  we do, with sets, so we would be computing integral of minus y d x plus x d y, with probably set since we're on the circle, x equals a cos theta, y equals a sine theta for theta between 0 and 2 pi. So then we would get d x and d y out of these. So y is a sine theta.  sine theta d theta, you should differentiate A cosine, plus A cos theta. A cos theta d theta. Well, you'll just end up with integral from 0 to 2 pi of A squared times sine square theta plus cosine square theta d theta. That becomes just 1, and you get the same answer. It took about the same amount of time, because I did this one, rushing very quickly.  about at least twice the amount of time to do it with a calculation.