 The following content is provided under a Creative Commons license. Your support will help MIT OpenCourseWare continue to offer high-quality educational resources for free. To make a donation or to view additional materials from hundreds of MIT courses, visit MIT OpenCourseWare at ocw.mit.edu. OK, so remember, last time, on Tuesday, we learned about the chain hole.  xyz. So for example, we saw that if we have a function that depends, sorry, on three variables xyz, but xyz, themselves, depends on some variable,  d x dt plus w sub y d y dt plus w sub z d dt. And the meaning of that formula is that, well, the change in w is caused by changes in x, y and z. x, y and z change at rates d x dt, d y dt, d dt, dt. And this causes the function to change accordingly, in terms of the partial derivatives.  tell you how sensitive W is to change it in each variable. So we're going to just rewrite this in a new notation. So I'm going to rewrite this in a more concise form as a gradient of W, that product with the velocity vector, dr dt, where, so the great thing  of w is a vector formed by putting together all of the partial derivatives. OK, so it's the vector with components of the potholes. And, of course, it's a vector that depends on x, y, and z. Right?  of w at some point xyz. So at each point it gives you a vector. That actually is what we will call later a vector field. We'll get back to that later. And dR dt is just the velocity vector, dX dt, dY dt, and the limit of xyz.  dz dt. So the new definition for today is the definition of a gradient vector. And our goal will be to understand a bit better what does this vector mean, what does it measure, and what can we do with it. But you see that in terms of information content, it's really the same information that's already in the partial derivatives.  x in the different form. And I should say, of course, you can also use the gradient in other things, like approximation formulas and so on. So far, it's just notation. It's a way to rewrite things. So here's the first cool property of the gradient.  So I claim that the gradient vector is perpendicular to the level surface, corresponding to setting the function w equal to a constant. OK, so if I draw a control plot of my function, so I'm going to actually forget about z, because I wanted to draw a two-variable control  So say I have a function of two variables x and y, then maybe it has some contour plot. And I'm saying if I take the gradient of the function at this point, xy, so I will have a vector. Well, if I draw that vector on top of a contour plot, it's going to end up being perpendicular to the level curve at this point. Same thing if I have a function of three variables, then I can try to draw its contour plot.  because the contour plot would be living in space with x, y, and z. But it would be a bunch of level surfaces. And the gradient vector would be a vector in space, but vector is perpendicular to the level surfaces. So let's try to see that on a couple of examples. So let's do a first example. Let's do things.  let's take a linear function of x, y and z. So I will take w equals a1 x x plus a2 xy plus a3 times c. So what's the gradient of this function? Well, the first component will be a1.  x sub l over u powerful y and a free. Powerful W powerful z. OK? Now, what are the level surfaces? Well, if I set W equal to some constant c, that means I look at the points where a1x plus a2y plus a3z equals c.  And we know how to find a normal vector to this plane, just by looking at the coefficients. So it's a plane with normal vector, exactly this gradient. And in fact, in a way, this is the only case you need to check because of linear approximation.  And we replace the level surfaces by their tension planes, and then you will actually end up in this situation. But maybe that's not very convincing. So let's do another example. So let's do a second example.  because that way I will be able to actually draw a picture for you. OK, so what are the level sets of this function? Well, they're going to be circles, right? W equals c is a circle x squared plus y squared equals c. So, I should say, maybe, sorry, say, the level curve is a circle.  So the control plot looks something like that. Now, what's the gradient vector? Well, the gradient of this function. So partial W, partial x, is 2x. And partial W, partial y is 2y.  and I try to draw my gradient vector. So here at xy, so I have to draw the vector 2x to y. What does it look like? Well, it's going in that direction. It's for R l to the position vector for this point. And it's actually twice the position vector. So I guess it goes more or less like this. What's interesting to us is it is there are a limit.  So I have an acula to this circle. So it's a general feature. Let me show you more examples. So I don't know if you can see it so well. Hopefully, you can. So here I have a contour plot of a function. And I have a blue vector.  for a pink point, and the gradient vector, of course, changes, because the gradient depends on x and y, but what doesn't change is that it's always perpendicular to the level curves. Anywhere where I am, my gradient stays perpendicular to the level curves. OK, is that convincing? Is that visible? Even for people who can see blue?  So, we have a lot of evidence, but let's try to prove the theorem, because it will be interesting. So, first of all, sorry, any questions about the statement, the examples?  A very good question. Why is the gradient vector, the harmonic un-curator, in one direction or rather than the other? So we'll see the answer to that in a few minutes. But let me just tell you immediately to decide which side it's pointing to. It's always pointing towards higher values of the function. And we'll see that maybe in about half an hour.  points, two words, higher values of W. Any other questions? I don't see any questions.  that just yet, that will come in a while. Well, maybe we want to understand, first, what happens if we move inside the level curve. OK, so let's imagine that we are taking a moving point that stays on the level curve or on the level surface. And then we know, well, what happens is that the function stays constant.  but we can also know how quickly the function change is using the chainhole up there. So maybe the chainhole will actually be the key to understanding how the gradient vector and emotion on the level surface relate. So let's take a curve, R equals R of t.  well, maybe I should say on the level surface, w equals c. So let's think about what that means. So just to get you used to this idea, I'm going to draw a level surface of a function of three variables.  xyz equals some constant c. And so now I'm going to have a point on that, and it's going to move on that surface. So I will have some parametric curve that lives on this surface. So the question is, what's going to happen at any given time?  what can I say about the velocity vector of this motion? It's going to be tangent to the level surface. If I move on a surface, then at any point my velocity is tangent to the curve, but if it's tangent to the curve, then it's also tangent to the surface. Because the curve is inside the surface. So, let's get a little bit cluttered. Maybe I should draw a bigger picture. Let me do that right away here.  So I have my level surface, the body will equal c. I have a curve in that. And at some point, I'm going to have a certain velocity. So the claim is that the  c, V equals dr dt, is tangent to the level we could see, because it's tangent to the curve, and the curve is inside the level.  is. So by the chain rule, we have dw dt, so the rate of change of the value of w as I move along this curve, is given by the dot product between the gradients and the velocity vector.  And so, well, maybe I can rewrite it as n about, n about W, sorry, del W, dot V, and that should be, well, what should it be? What happens to the value of W as T changes? Well, it stays constant because we are moving on a curve, that curve might be complicated, but it stays always on the right.  the level, w equals c. So it's 0 because w of t equals c, which is a constant. OK, is that convincing? Yeah? OK, so now if we have a dot product that's 0, that tells us that these two guys are perpendicular. So,  So the gradient vector is perpendicular to the. OK, that's a good start. We know that the gradient is perpendicular to this vector, tangent, to the level surface. What about other vectors, tangent to the level surface? Well, in fact, I could use any curve drawn on the level of w equals c.  So, I could move really any way I wanted on that surface. In particular, I claim that I could have chosen my velocity vector to be any vector tangent to the surface. OK, so let's write this.  the level surface, w equals c. So that means V can be any vector tangent to the surface, tangent to the level. For example, let me draw one more picture.  So I have my level surface, so I'm drawing more and more levels, and I'll never quite look the same. And I have a point, and at this point I have the tangent plane to the level surface. This is tangent plane to the level.  in that tension plane, let's say I choose and know, the one that goes in that direction. Then I can actually find a curve that goes in that direction and stays on the level. So here, that would be a curve that somehow goes from the right to the left, and of course, it has to end up going up, or something like that.  vector tangent, let's call that vector V, tangent to the level we get that the gradient is perpendicular to the, so the gradient is perpendicular to this vector, tangent to this curve, but also to any vector, I can draw, that's  means the gradient is actually perpendicular to the tension plane or to the surface at this point.  And, well, here, I've illustrated things with a three-dimensional example, but really, it works for a same if you have only two variables. When you have a level curve, it has a tension between line, and the gradient is perpendicular to that line. OK, any questions?  So let's see. That's actually quite in need because there's a nice application of this, which is to try to figure out now we know actually how to find the tangent plane to anything, pretty much.  OK, so let's see. So let's say that, for example, I want to find the  xn to the surface with a equation, let's say x-square plus y-squared minus z-squared equals 4, at the point 2, 1, 1, let divide that.  So how do we do that? Well, one way that we already know, if we solve this for z, so we can write z equals function of x and y, then we know tangent plane approximation for the graph of a function z equals some function of x and y. But that doesn't look like it's the best way to do it. The best way to do it, now that we have the gradient vector, is actually to directly say,  the natural line, the normal vector, will just be the gradient. I think I have a cool picture. So that's what it looks like. So here you have the surface x square plus y square minus z square equals 4. That's called a hyperbolarid, because it looks like what you get when you spin a hyperbolar around the next list. And here's its tangent plane at the given point.  So it doesn't look very attention because it crosses the surface. But it's really, I mean, if you think about it, you'll see that it's really the claim that approximating the surface in the best way that you can at this given point. It is really the tangential claim. So how do we find this plane? Well, you can put it on a computer, but that's not exactly, you know,  how you would look for it in the first place. So the way to do it is that we compute the gradient. So the gradient of what? Well, the gradient of this function. So I should say this is the level set, w equals 4, where w is x squared plus y squared.  minus c squared. And so we know that the gradient of this, well, what is it? 2x, then 2y, and then negative 2z. So at this given point, I guess we add x equals 2, so that's 4, and then y and z are 1.  to negative 2. And that's going to be the normal vector to the surface or to the tangent plane. And that's one way to define the tangent plane. It has the same normal vector as the surface. That's one way to define the normal vector to the surface if you prefer. Being perpendicular to the surface means that you're perpendicular to its tangent plane.  So the equation is, well, for x plus 2y minus 2z equals something, where something is, well, we should just plug in that point, will get 8 plus 2 minus 2, which looks like will get 8.  are very important here. So now if you have a surface given by an evil equation, and the point on the surface, well, you know how to find the tension plane to the surface at that point. Any questions? OK, let me give just another reason why another way that we could have seen this.  So I claim, in fact, we could have done this without the gradient, or using the gradient in somehow a disguised way. So here's another way. So the other way to do it would be to start with a differential.  minus 2y, sorry, plus 2y dy, minus 2z dz. So at the given point, at 2, 1, 1, this is for dx plus 2 dy minus 2 dz. Now, if we want to change this into an approximation formula we can, we know that the change in w,  is approximately equal to 4 delta x plus 2 delta y minus 2 delta z. So when do we stay on the level surface? Well, we stay on the level surface when w doesn't change. So when this becomes 0. Now, what does this approximation sign mean?  This guy will be close to that guy. It also means something else. Remember, with this approximation, formulas, there are linear approximations. They mean that we replace the function, actually, by some closest linear formula that will be nearby. And so in particular, if we set this equal to 0, instead of, you know, approximately 0, it means we'll actually be moving on the tangent plane to the level of set. If you want setting equalities and approximations,  that we replace the function by its tangent  OK, so the level corresponds to delta w equals 0, and its tension plane corresponds to for delta x.  plus 2 delta y minus 2 delta z equals 0. That's what I'm trying to say, basically. And what's delta x? Well, that means it's the change in x. So what's the change in x here? That means, well, we started with x equals 2, and we move to some other value, x. So that's actually x minus 2. Right? That's how much x has changed compared to 2.  xy minus 1, minus 2 times z minus 1, equals 0. That's the equation of the tangent plane. It's the same equation as the one over there. There's also two different methods to get it. So this one explains to you what's going on in terms of,  So, in a way, with this one, you don't have to think nearly as much. But you can use either one. OK, questions? OK, so let's move on to a new topic, which is another application of a gradient vector.  is directional derivatives. OK, so let's say that we have a function of two variables, x and y. Well, we know how to compute partial to the value of partial x, or partial to the value of x.  or part for y, which measure how double you change is if I move in the direction of the x-axis or in the direction of the y-axis. So what about moving in other directions? Well, of course, we've seen approximation from Nurlas and so on, but we can still ask, is there a derivative in every direction? And that's basically, yes, that's the direction of derivative. So these are derivatives.  in the direction of i hat or j hat, the vectors that go along the x of a y axis. So what if we move in another direction?  OK, so if I give you a unit vector, you can ask yourself if I move in the direction how quickly will my function change. So let's look at a straight line trajectory, what this should.  mean is I started some value xy and then I have my vector u and I'm going to move in a straight line in the direction of u. And I have the graph of my function. And I'm asking myself how quickly does the value change when I move on the graph in that direction?  So let's look at the straight line trajectory. So we have a position vector R, that will depend on some parameter, which I will call S. Let's see why very soon in such a way that the derivative is this given unit vector,  So why do I use S for my parameter, rather than t? Well, it's a convention. I'm moving at unit speed along this line. So that means that actually I'm parameterizing things by the distance that I've traveled along this line. So here, it's called S in the sense of arc length.  functions along the line. OK, so because we are parameterizing by distance, we're just using S as a convention, just to distinguish it with, you know, this which is from other situations. And so now the question will be, what is dw ds?  of change of w, when I move like that. Well, of course, we know the answer, because that's a special case of a chain rule. So that's how we will actually compute it. But in terms of what it means, it really means we are asking ourselves, we start at a point, and we change the variables in a certain direction, which is not necessarily the x of a y direction, but really any direction.  are actually a little bit of in that direction. Does that make sense as a concept? I see some faces that are not completely convinced. So maybe I should show more pictures.  So I just want to give you the actual definition. So, sorry, so first of all, in case you wonder what this is all about. So let's say that the components of our unit vector are two numbers a and b.  x of s equals some initial value, the point where we are actually looking at the directional derivative, plus s times a, let me say plus a times s, and y of s equals y0 plus b times s.  and then we take the derivative. So we have a notation for that, which is going to be dwds, with a subscript in the direction of you to indicate in which direction we're actually going to move. And that's called the directional derivative.  is less than or equal to the direction of you.  So we've seen things about partial derivatives, and we've seen that the partial derivatives are the slopes of slices of the graph by vertical planes that are parallel to the x of the y-direction. So if I have a point, at any point, I can slice the graph of my function by two planes, one that's going along the x, along the y-direction,  Slices of the graph, let me see if I can use what I think. So we can look at the slices of the graph. They are drawn here. And then we look at the tangent lines to the slices, and we look at their slope, and that gives us the partial derivatives, in case you're on that side. We want to see also the pointer of the minerals here. OK, so now similarly, the directional derivative means, actually, will be slicing,  We'll be slicing R graph by a vertical plane. That's not very colorful. Something more colorful. We'll be slicing things by a plane that is now in the direction of this vector, u, and we'll be looking at the slope of the slice of the graph. So what that looks like here, so that's the same applet by the way that you've used.  on your problem set in case you're wondering. So now I'm picking a point on the contour plot. And at that point, I slice the graph. So here I'm starting by slicing in the direction of the x-axis. So in fact, what I'm measuring here by the slope of the slice is the partial, in the x direction, it's really partial f partial x, which is also the direction of derivative in the direction of x, of x.  And now if I rotate the slice, then I have all of these planes. So you see at the bottom left, I have the direction in which I'm going. There's this like rotating line that tells you in which direction I'm going to be moving. And for each direction I have a plane, and when I slice by that plane, I will get, so I have this direction here going maybe to the southwest. So that gives me a slice of my graph by a vertical plane.  and the slice has a certain slope and the slope is going to be the directional derivative in that direction. I think that's as graphic as I can get. Any questions about that? Nope. OK, so let's see how we compute that guy.  OK, so let me just write again, just in case you want to. This you can hear me.  that contains the given direction, that's parallel to the direction you. So how do we compute it? Well, we can use the chainhole. The chainhole implies that dw ds is actually the gradient of w. Product with the velocity vector, dl,  are the S, but remember we say that we are going to be moving at unit speed in the direction of U. So in fact, that's just gradient w, that product with the unit vector U. So the formula that we remember is really dw of dS in the direction of U is gradient w,  product with you. And maybe I should also say in words, this is the component of the gradient in the direction of you. And maybe that makes more sense. So, for example, the direction of the direction of i-hat is the component along the x-axis.  as, indeed, the partial derivative in the x-direction. Things make sense. dw ds with the direction of i hat is, sorry, I don't even care. Right, then, w.i hat, which is the value sub x, or the actual point, partial to the value of r power x.  Now, so that's basically what we need to know to compute this guys. So now let's go back to the gradient and see what this tells us about the gradient.  x is also positive. I see you guys are having fun.  in the direction of u is gradient w dot u. That's the same as the length of gradient w times the length of u. Well, that happens to be 1, because we are taking the unit vector, times the cosine of the angle between the gradient and the given unit vector.  So, have this angle theta. OK, that's another way of saying we're taking the component of the gradient in the direction of few. But now, what does that tell us? Well, let's try to figure out in which directions W changes the fastest, in which direction it increases the most, or decreases the most, or doesn't actually change.  So, this is, when this is going to be the largest, if I fix a point, if I set a point, then the gradient vector at that point is given to me. But, question is, in which direction does it change the most quickly? Well, what I can change is the direction, and this will be the largest when the cosine is 1. So, this is largest when cosine of the angle is 1.  is 0, that means u is actually in the direction of the gradient. So that's a new way to think about the direction of the gradient. The gradient is the direction in which the function increases the most quickly at that point.  of the rate in W is the direction of first test in c of W at the given point. And what is the magnitude of W?  So if I go in that direction which gives me the fastest increase, then the corresponding slope will be the length of the gradient. And what's the direction of fastest decrease?  straight down. So the minimal value of dwds is achieved when cosine of theta is minus 1. That means theta equals 180 degrees. That means u is in the direction of minus the gradient.  And, finally, when do we have dw ds equals 0? So in which direction does the function not change? Well, we have two answers to that. One is to just use that formula. So that's when cosine theta equals 0.  that means that u is perpendicular to the right end. The other way to think about it, a direction in which the value doesn't change, is a direction that's tangent to the level of the surface. If we are not changing, it means we are moving along the level. And that's the same thing, as being tangent to the level.  So let me just show that in the picture here. So if I actually show you the gradient, you can't really see it here. I need to move a bit. So the gradient here is pointing straight up at the point that I've chosen. Now, if I choose a slice that's perpendicular, in the direction that's perpendicular to the gradient, so that's actually tangent to the level curve, then you see that my slice is flat.  direction of derivative in a direction that's perpendicular to the gradient is basically 0. Now, if I rotate, then the slope slowly increases, increases, increases, and it becomes the largest when I'm going in the direction of the gradient. So here, I have, actually, a pretty big slope. And now, if I keep rotating, then the slope will decrease again. Then it becomes 0 when I'm perpendicular, and then it becomes negative, it's the most negative when I'm pointing away from the gradient, and then it becomes 0.  again, when I'm back at the upper n equivalent. OK? So for example, if I give you a counterplot and I ask you to draw the direction of a gradient vector, well, at this point, for example, you would look at the picture, the gradient vector would be going per point equivalent to the level, and it would be going towards higher values of a function. And I don't know if you can see the labels, but the thing in the middle is a minimum. So it would actually be pointing in this kind of a real number.  of the direction. So that's it for today.