 The following content is provided under a Creative Commons license. Your support will help MIT OpenCourseWare continue to offer high-quality educational resources for free. To make a donation or to view additional materials from hundreds of MIT courses, visit MIT OpenCourseWare at ocw.mit.edu. So, you know, basically, for the last few weeks we've been doing derivatives, now we're going to do integrals.  intervals. So, more precisely, we're going to be talking about double integrals.  let me just remind you that when you have a function of one variable, say, f of x, and if you take its integral from, say, a to b of f of x dx, well, that corresponds to the area below the graph of f of x.  f of the interval from a to b. So the picture is something like, you have b, you have the graph of f, and then what the integral measures is the area of this interval.  And when we say the area of this region, of course, if f is positive, that's what happens. If f is negative, then we count negatively the area below the x-axis. So now, when you have a function of two variables, then you can try to do the same thing, namely, you can plot its graph. Its graph will be a surface in space. And then we can try to look for the volume below the graph.  of a function over a certain region. OK, so let's say that we have a function of two variables x and y. Then we'll look at the volume that's below the graph, z equals f of xy.  So let's draw a picture for what this means. I have a function of x and y. I can draw its graph. The graph will be the surface with equation, z equals f of x and y. And, well, I have to decide where I will integrate the function. So for that, I will choose some region in the xy-clane.  And I will integrate the function on that region. So, it's over the region R in the xy-clin. So, I have this region R, and I look at the piece of the graph that is above this region, and will try to compute the volume of this solid here.  the double integral will measure. So we'll call that the double integral of our original R, of f of xy, dA, and I will have to explain what the notation means. So dA here stands for a piece of aria, a stands for aria, and well, it's a double integral. So that's why we have two integral signs.  somehow the region over which we're integrating. We'll come up with more concrete notations when we see how to actually compute these things. So that's the basic definition. So actually, well, that's not really much of a definition yet. How do we actually define this, regardlessly? Well, remember the integral in one variable, you probably saw a definition where you take your interval from a to b and you cut it into little pieces.  And then for each little piece, you take the value of a function and you multiply by the width of a piece that gives you a rectangular slice and then you sum all of these rectangular slices together. So here we'll do the same thing. So, well, let me put a picture up and explain what it does. So we are going to cut our region into little pieces, say little rectangle, so actually anything we want.  And then for each piece, with a small area delta a, we'll take the area delta a, times the value of a function in there that will give us the volume of a small box that sits under the graph. And then we'll add all these boxes together that gives us an estimate of the volume. And then to get actually the integral, the integral will be defined as a limit as we subdivide into smaller and smaller boxes and with some more and more pieces.  So, actually, what we do, I still have a board here. So, the actual definition involves getting R into small pieces of R here.  maybe delta aI, the area of the Ith piece. And then, OK, so maybe in the xy plane we have our region and we'll cut it, maybe using some red. OK, and then we'll have each small piece, each small piece, will have a real delta a or maybe delta aI, and it will be at some point,  I call it xi yi, yi xi, and then we'll consider the sum of all the pieces of f at that point, xi yi, times the r here of a small piece. So what that corresponds to in the three-dimensional picture is just I sum the volumes of all of these little  that's set under the graph. And then, so what I do is, actually, I take the limit as the size of the pieces,  And that gives me the double integral. Sorry, that's not a very good sentence, but whatever. So, OK, so that's the definition. Of course, we'll have to see how to compute it. We don't actually compute it. When you compute an integral in single variable calculus, you don't do that. You don't cut into little pieces and sum the pieces together. You've learned how to integrate functions using various formulas.  how to actually compute these things without doing that, cutting into small pieces. Any questions, first, about the concept? What the definition is? Yes?  all the tricks you've learned in single-viable calculus will come in handy. So, yes, that's a strong signal, by the way, that if you've forgotten everything about single-viable calculus, now might be a good time to actually brush up on integrals. The usual integrals and the usual substitution tricks and easy trick in particular. This will be very useful. So, yes, so how do we compute these things?  that's what we have to come up with. And, well, going back to what we did with derivatives, to understand variations of functions and derivatives, what we did was really we took slices parallel to an excess or another one. So in fact, here are the keys also the same. So what we're going to do is, instead of cutting into a lot of small boxes like that and summing completely at random, we'll actually somehow scan our region, scan through our region, by parallel,  are the planes. So let me put up actually a slightly different picture up here. So what I'm going to do is I'm going to take planes, say in this picture parallel to the yz plane, I'll take a moving plane that scans from the back to the front or from the front to the back. So that means I set a value of x0 of x, and I look at the slice x equals x0, and then I will do that for all  all values of x0. So now in each slice, well, I get what looks a lot like a single variable in TIGR. OK, and that integral will tell me what is the RIA in this, well, I guess it was supposed to be green, but it all comes as black. So let's say the black shaded slice, and then when I add all of these RIA's together as the value of x changes, I will get the volume. OK, let me try to explain that in here.  So to compute this integral, what we do is actually we take slices. So let's consider, let's call S of x, the area of a slice,  x is just the area of this thing in the vertical world. Now, if you sum all of these, well, let's see, why does that work? So, if you take the region between two parallel slices that are very close to each other, what's the volume of the original?  between these two things. Well, it's essentially S of x times the thickness of this very thin slice. And the thickness would be delta x, so d x, if you take a limit with more and more slices. So, the volume will be the integral of S of x, d x.  x, well, we would have to start at the very lowest value of x that ever happens in our region, and we'd have to go all the way to the very largest value of x, OK, from the very far back to the very far front. So on this picture, we'll probably start over here at the back, and we'd end over here at the front.  just say from the minimum x to the maximum x. And now, how do we find S of x? Well, S of x will be actually, again, an integral. But now, it's an integral of a variable y, because when we look at the slice, what change is from left to right is y.  well, let me actually write that down. For a given x, the area S of x, you can compute as an integral of f of xy dy. OK, well, now x is a constant and y will be the variable of integration. What's the range for y?  the left most point here, to the right most point here, on the given slice. So there's a big catch here. That's a very important thing to remember. The range of integration for y depends actually on x. See, if I take this slice, that's pictured on that diagram, then the range for y goes all the way from the very left to the very right.  And then, in fact, only a very small segment of it will be in my region. So the range of values for y will be much less. Let me actually draw a 2d picture for that. So remember, we fix x and we value, sorry, so we fix a value of x. And for a given value of x, what we'll do is we'll slice our graph by this plane parallel to the yz plane.  is sitting above that, and that's the region R. I have the region R, and I have the graph of a function above this region R, and I'm trying to find the area between this segment and the graph above it in this vertical plane. Well, to do that, I have to integrate from y going from the left of the left,  here to here. I want the area of a piece that sits above this red segment. And so in particular, the endpoints, the extreme values for y depend on x. Because see, if I slice here instead, well, my bounds for y will be smaller. OK, so now if I put the two things together, what I will get,  x is actually a formula where I have to integrate over x, an integral over y.  And so this is called an iterated integral, because we iterate twice the process of taking an integral. So again, what's important to realize here, I mean, I'm going to say that several times over the next few days,  but that's because it's the single most important thing to remember about double integrals. The bounds here are just going to be numbers, OK, because the question that I'm asking myself here is what is the first value of x by which I might want to slice and what is the last value of x? You know, which range of x do I want to look at to take my right slices? And the answer is I would go all the way from here, that's my first slice,  some where here, that's my last slice. For any value in between these, I will have some red segment, and I will, in one, to integrate over that. On the other hand, here, the bounds will depend on the outer variable x, because if I fix a value of x, what the values of y will be depends on x, in general. OK. So I think probably we should  to do lots of examples to convince ourselves, you know, and see how it works. Yeah, it's called an  how the bounds on y depend on x. But actually, you could also do it the other way around. First, take a right over x, and then over y. And then the bounds for x would depend on y. We'll see that on an example. Yes? For your y values, are you using starting points, which is using the highest possible range for y? So for y, I'm using the range of values for y that corresponds to the given value of x.  A plot in the xy plane, above that we have the graph. Maybe I should draw a picture here instead. For a given value of x, so that's a given slice, I have a range of values for y that is from the spectrals the leftmost point on that slice to the rightmost point on that slice. So where I start and where I stop, depends on the value of x. Does that make sense?  OK, no more questions? No? OK, so let's do a first example. So let's say that we want to integrate the function 1 minus x square minus y squared over the region.  defined by x between 0 and 1 and y between 0 and 1. So what does that mean, geometrically? Well, z equals 1 minus x square minus y squared, and it's a variation on something. I think, actually, we've plotted that one, right? That was our first example of a function of two variables, possibly. And so we saw that the graph is this paraboloid pointing downwards.  are rotating it. And now what we're asking is, what is the volume between the parable  x varies from 0 to 1. And here, of course, setting up a bounds will be easy, because no matter what x I take, y still goes from 0 to 1. See, it's easiest to do double integrals when the region is just a rectangle in the xy-plane, because then you don't have to worry too much about what are the ranges. OK, so let's do it. Well, that would be the integral from 0 to 1.  1 of the integral from 0 to 1 of 1 minus x square minus y squared d y d x. So I'm dropping the parentheses, but if you still want to see them, I'm going to put them in very thin. So as you see what it means, but actually, the convention is we won't put these parentheses in there anymore. So what this means is, first, I will integrate 1 minus x squared minus y squared over y minus x squared.  are you're ranging from 0 to 1 with x held fixed. So what that represents is the area in this slice. So see here, actually, I've drawn, well, what happens is actually the function takes positive and negative values. So in fact, I will be counting positively this part of the area, and I will be counting negatively this part of the area. I mean, as usual, when I do an integral.  what I will do to evaluate this, I will first do what's called the inner integral. So to do the inner integral, well, it's pretty easy. How do I integrate this?  And the only thing to remember is we're only taking it with respect to y, not to x. OK? The integral of x squared is x squared times y. And the integral of y squared is y cubed over 3. OK? And then we plug in the bounds, which are 0 and 1 in this case. And so when you plug y equals 1, you will get 1 minus x squared minus 1 third.  minus, well, from y equals 0, you get 0, 0, 0. So nothing changes. Yes, you're left with two-thirds minus x squared. OK, and that's a function of x only. Here, you shouldn't see any y's anymore, because y was your integration variable. But you still have x. You still have x because the area of this shaded slice, depends, of course, on the value of x.  And so now, the second thing to do is to do the outer interval. So now we integrate from 0 to 1 what we got, which is 2-thirds minus x squared, dx. And we know how to compute that, because that integrates to 2-thirds x minus 1-third x cubed,  0 and 1, and I let you do the computation, you will find it's one-third. OK, so that's the final answer. So that's the general pattern. See, when we have a double integral to compute, first we want to set it up carefully. We want to find what will be the bounds in x and y. And here, that was actually pretty easy, because our region was very simple. Then we want to compute the inner integral,  And then we compute the outer integral. And that's it. Any questions at this point? So by the way, we started with dA in the notation. Right? Here we had dA. And that somehow became a dy dx.  x, the A became d y d x, because when we do the I-teratene integral this way, what we're actually doing is that we are slicing our region into small rectangles. Now, what's the area of this small rectangle here? Well, it's the product of its width, times its height.  equals delta x delta y, it becomes really equal. So, for smaller epsilon, it's false.  of in which order we do the I-terradin integral. It's up to us to decide whether we want to integrate x first, then y, or y first, then x. But as we'll see very soon, that is an important decision when it comes to setting up the bounds of integration. Here it doesn't matter, but in general we have to be very careful about in which order we'll do things. Yes?  because the region has a strange shape, you can actually set it up more easily, one way than the other. Sometimes it will also be that the function here, you actually know how to integrate in one way but not the other. So the theory is that it should work both ways. In practice, one of the two calculations may be much harder.  let's do another example. Let's say that what I wanted to know was not actually what I computed, namely the volume below the parable array, but also the negative of some part that's in the corner towards me.  n times square of size 1, I should just integrate over the quarter disk. I should stop integrating where my parable read hits the xy plane. So let me draw another picture. So let's say I wanted to integrate, actually.  2, so it's the same, we're going to do the same function, but other, a different region. And the region will just be now this part of this here. So maybe I should draw a picture in the xy-plane. That's my new region R.  OK, so in principle it will be the same integral, but what change is, is the bounds. Why do the bounds change? Well, the bounds change, because now if I set, if I fix some value of x, then I will want to integrate this part of the slightly  nice, that's above the xy plane, and I don't want to take this part that's actually outside of my disk. So I should stop integrating over y when y reaches this value here. On that picture here, on this picture, it tells me for a fixed value of x, the range of values for y should go only from here to here, so that's from here to less than 1.  So for a given x, the range of y is, well, so what's the lowest value of y that I will want to look at? It's still 0, from y equals 0, to what's the value of y here, well, I have to solve in the equation of a circle.  If I'm here, this is x squared plus y squared equals 1. That means y is square root of 1 minus x squared. OK, so I will integrate from y equals 0 to y equals square root of 1 minus x squared. And now you see how the bound for y will depend on the value of x. OK, so what I here is, I will let you think about what is the bound for x.  Now, it's a trick question.  OK, so I claim that what will do, so we'll write this as an iterative integral,  the range for y is from 0 to square root of 1 minus x squared. What about the range for x? Well, the range for x should just be numbers. Remember, the question I have to ask now is if I look at all of these yellow slices, which one is the first one that I want to consider? Which one is the last one that I want to consider? So the smallest value of x that I want to consider is 0, again.  And then I will have there, I will actually have a pretty big slice, and I will get smaller and smaller and smaller slices, and it stops, I have to stop when x equals 1. Afterwards, there's nothing else to integrate. So x goes from 0 to 1. OK, and now, see how in the inner integral of the bounds, depend on x, in the outer one, you just get numbers.  to set up this one and to set up that one, are different. Here, the question is, if I fix a given x, if I look at the given slice, what's the range for y, here, the question is, what's the first slice, what is the last slice? Does that make sense? Everyone happy with that? OK, very good. So now, how do we compute that?  we do the inner integral. So that's integral from 0 to square root of 1 minus x squared, of 1 minus x square minus y squared d y. And, well, that integrates to y minus x squared y minus y cube dot are free, from 0 to square root of 1 minus x squared.  And then that becomes, well, a root of 1 minus x squared, minus 1 minus x squared, minus 1 minus x squared, to the three halves of a three. And actually, if you look at it for long enough, see, this is 1 minus x squared times square root of 1 minus x squared. So actually, that's also, so in fact, that simplifies to two-thirds of 1 minus x squared.  to the free-haves. OK, let me redo that maybe. Slightly differently. This was 1 minus x squared times y. So 1 minus x squared times y becomes square root of 1 minus x squared.  x y cubed over 3, and then when I take y equals 0, I get 0, so I don't subtract anything. Now you see this is 1 minus x squared to the 3 halves minus a third of it. So you're left with two-thirds. So that's the inner integral. The outer integral is integral from 0 to 1 of two-thirds of 1 minus x squared to the 3 halves,  x, and well, I let you see if you remember single-viable in.  OK, well, I guess we have to do it then. I've also been on my notes, but it's not very clear. OK, so how do we compute this thing? Well, we have to do trig, substitution. That's the only way I know to compute anything all like that. OK, so we'll set x equals sine theta, and then, so, let's say,  square root of 1 minus x squared will be cosine theta.  x squared to the 3 halves becomes cosine cubed theta. dx, well, if x is sine theta, then dx is cosine theta, the theta. So that's cosine theta, the theta. And well, if you do things, the difference of the way I do them, then you should worry about the bounds for theta, which will be 0 to pi over 2, or you can also just plug in the bounds at the end.  So now you have the two-thirds times the integral from 0 to pi over 2, of cosine to the 4 theta d theta. And how do you integrate that? Well, you have to use double-angle formulas. OK, so cosine to the 4, remember, cosine square theta,  is 1 plus cosine 2theta over 2. And we want the square of that. And so that will give us, well, we'll have, so,  cosine 2theta, plus 1-quarter cosine square 2theta, dtheta. And how will you handle this guy, well, using again for the ball-angle formula? OK, so it's getting slightly nasty. So, but I don't know any simpler solution, except for one simpler solution, which has you have a table of integrals of this form inside the notes.  1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1,  So, OK, so exercise, continue calculating and get pi over 8. OK, now what does this show us?  And quite what we do with this will be to integrate it in polar coordinates.  So that will be easier in polar coordinates. So we'll see that tomorrow. OK, so what you know, we are almost there. I mean, here you just use the lower angle again and then you can get it. And it's pretty straightforward. OK, so one thing that's kind of interesting, is that, in fact,  to know is we can exchange the order of integration. So if we have an integral given to us in the order dy dx, we can switch it to dx dy. But we have to be extremely careful with the bounds. So you certainly cannot just swap the bounds of the inner and outer, because there you would end up having this square root of 1 minus x square on the outside, and you would never get a number out of it.  So that cannot work. It's more complicated than that. OK, so, well, here's a first baby example. Certainly, if I do integral from 0 to 1, integral from 0 to 2, dx dy, I can certainly switch the bounds, without thinking too much. What's the reason for that? Well, the reason for that is, you know, this corresponds in both cases to integrating the real numbers.  x from 0 to 2 and y from 0 to 1, it's a rectangle. So if I slice it this way, you see that y goes from 0 to 1 for any x between 0 and 2. It's this game. If I slice it that way, then x goes from 0 to 2 for any value of y between 0 and 1, and it's this one. So here it works. But in general, I have to draw a picture of my region and see how the slices look like,  So, for example, let's prove for these. OK, so let's do a more interesting one.  way to integrate e to the y over y. So this is an integral that you cannot compute this way. So it's a good example for why this can be useful. So if you do it this way, you're stuck immediately. So instead, we'll try to switch the order. But to switch the order, we have to understand what do these bounds mean. So let's draw a picture of the region. Well, what we're saying is why goes from y equals 1 to x,  equals x to y equals square root of x. Well, let's draw y equals x. And y equals square root of x. Well, maybe I should actually put this here, y equals x to y equals square root of x. OK? And so I will go for each value of x.  I will go from y equals x to y equals square root of x. And I will do that for values of x that go from x equals 0 to x equals 1, which happens to be exactly where these things intersect. So my region will consist of all of this. OK? So now, if I want to do it the other way around, I have to decompose my region,  I have to, so my goal now is to rewrite this as an integral, well, it's still the same function. It's still e to the y over y, but now I want to integrate dx dy. So how do I integrate over x? Well, I fix a value of y, and for that value of y, what's the range for x? Well, the range for x is from here to here. OK, what's the value of x here?  this is x equals y. What about this one?  switching the bounds is not completely obvious. That took a little bit of work. But now that we've done that, well, just to see how it goes, it's actually going to be much easier to integrate, because in our integral, well, what's the integral of e to the y over y with respect to x? It's just that times x, right?  y, so that will be, well, if I plug x equals y, I will get e to the y minus, if I plug x equals y squared, I will get e to the y of y times y squared, e to the y times y. OK? So now, if I do the outer integral, I will have the integral from 0 to 1 of e to the y minus y e to the y d y.  And that one actually is a little bit easier. So we know how to integrate e to the y. We don't quite know how to integrate y e to the y, but let's try. So let's see. What's the derivative of y e to the y? Well, by the product role that's 1 times e to the y plus y times the derivative of e to the y is y e to the y.  So if we do, let's put a minus sign in front. Well, that's almost what we want, except we have a minus e to the y, instead of a plus e to the y. So we need to add 2e to the y. And I claim that's the anti-derivative. OK, if you got lost, you can also do it by integrating by parts, by taking the derivative of y and integrating this guy.  minus y e to the y, take the derivative of that, compare, see what you need to do to fix. So if you take that between 0 and 1, you will eventually get e minus 2. OK, so, tomorrow we are going to see how to do double integrals and polar coordinates, and also applications of double integrals, how to use them for interesting things.