 The following content is provided under a Creative Commons license. Your support will help MIT OpenCourseWare continue to offer high-quality educational resources for free. To make a donation or to view additional materials from hundreds of MIT courses, visit MIT OpenCourseWare at ocw.mit.edu.  have non-independents variables. So I have a delivery here for a j sub n.  OK, so Jason Euch, please claim your package at the end of lecture. OK, so last time we saw how to use Lagrange multipliers to find the minimum or maximum of a function of several variables, when the variables are not independent. And today we are going to try to figure out more about the fact that the fact that the limit of the natural numbers  with the relations between variables and how to handle functions that depend on several variables when they are related. So, just to give you an example, in physics very often, you have functions that depend on pressure, volume and temperature, where pressure, volume and temperature, are actually not independent, but they are related, say, by PV equals NRT. So, of course, when you can substitute and express the functions  in terms of two of them only, but very often it's convenient to keep all free. But then we have to figure out what are the rates of change of p and v with respect to t, with respect to each other, the rate of change of f with respect to these variables, and so on. So we have to figure out what we mean by partial derivatives, again. OK, I mean,  let's say just for the sake of notation, I'm going to think of a function of three variables x, y, z, where the variables are related by some equation, but they will put in the form g of x, y, z equals some constant. OK, so that's the same kind of set up as we had last time, except now we are not just looking for minima and maxima. We are trying to understand partial derivatives.  And the first observation is that if x, y and z are related, then that means, in principle, we could solve for one of them and express it as a function of the two others. So in particular, can we understand, even without solving, maybe we cannot solve, can we understand how the variables are related to each other?  x and y, so we can ask ourselves what are the rates of change of z with respect to x, keeping y constant, or with respect to y, keeping x constant. And, of course, if we can solve, then we know a formula for this, and then we can compute these guys.  x is less than x, this thing's without solving. So let's do an example. Let's say that my relation is x squared plus yz plus z cube equals 8. And let's say that I'm looking near the point xyz equals 2 3 1.  for a times 1 plus 1 cubed is indeed 8. OK, but now if I change x and y a little bit, how does z change? Well, of course, I could solve for z in here. It's a cubic equation. There is actually a formula. But that formula is quite complicated. We actually don't want to do that. That's an easier way. So how can we do it?  look at the differential of this constraint quantity. So if we call this g, let's look at dg. So what's the differential of this? So the function of x squared is 2x dx,  x is a zy, there's a y dz, and there's also a 3z-squared dz. OK, you can get this either by implicit differentiation and the product whole, or you can get this just by putting here and here the partial derivatives of this with respect to x, y and z. OK, any questions about how I got this?  So now, what do I do with this? Well, this represents somehow variations of g. But, well, I've set this thing equal to 8, and 8 is a constant. So it doesn't change. So, in fact, well, we can set this to 0.  well, they call this g, then g equals 8 is constant. That means we set dg equal to 0. OK, so now let's just plug in some values at this point. That tells us, well, so if x equals 2, that's for dx,  is 1, so in d y, plus y plus 3c square, should be 6 dz equals 0. And now, this equation here tells us about a relation between the changes in x, y, and z near that point. It tells us how if you change x and y, well, how z will change. Or it tells you, actually, anything you might want to know about the relations between these variables.  example, you can move dz to that side and then express dz in terms of dx and dy, or you can move dy to that side and express dy in terms of dx and dz and so on. It tells you, at the level of the derivatives, how each of the variables depends on the two others. OK, so just to clarify this, if we want to view z as a function of x and y,  then what we will do is we'll just move the dz to the other side, and it will tell us dz equals minus 1 over 6 times 4dx plus dy. And so that should tell you that partial z over partial x is minus 4 over 6.  x of c over partial y is going to be minus 1.6. OK, another way to think about this. When we compute partial of the partial x, that means that actually we keep y constant. OK, let me actually add some subtitles here. So here, that means we keep y constant.  And so if we keep y constant, another way to think about it is we set dy to 0. We set dy equals 0. So if we do that, we get dx equals negative for 6 dx. That tells us the rate of change of z with respect to x. Here we set x constant, so that means we set dx equal to 0.  x equals 0, then we have dz equals negative 1.6 of dy that tells us the rate of change of z with respect to y. Any questions about that? No? What? Yes?  And an expression for dz in terms of dx and dy, that means that this thing is the differential, is the total differential of z viewed as a function of x and y. And so the coefficients of dx and dy are the partials. Another way to think about it, if you want to know partial z-partial x, it means you set y to be constant. Setting y to be constant means that you will put 0 in the place of dy.  minus 4.6 dx. And that will give you the rate of change of z with respect to x, when you keep y constant. So there are just ways to think about this. But hopefully, it makes sense. OK, so how do we think about this in general?  well, if we know that g of xyz equals constant, then dg, which is g sub x dx plus g sub y dy plus g sub z dz, should be set equal to 0.  And now we can solve for whichever variable we want to express in terms of variables. So, for example, if we care about z as a function of x and y, we'll get that dz is negative g sub x of our g sub z.  d x minus g sub y of Lg sub z, d y. And so if we want partial z of our partial x, well, so one way is just to say that's going to be the coefficient of d x in here, or just to write down the other way, we are setting,  y equals constant, so that means we set dy equal to 0. And then we get dz equals negative g sub x over g sub z d x. So that means partial z over partial x is minus g x over gz. And see, that's a very counterintuitive formula, because you have that limit.  is minus sign that you somehow probably couldn't have seen come if you hadn't actually derived things this way. And it's quite surprising to see that minus sign come out of nowhere the first time you see it. OK, so now we know how to find the rates of change of constraint variables with respect to each other.  to find if you want partial x partial y, or any other thing, you can do it. Any questions so far? No? OK. So, before we proceed further, I should probably expose some problem with the notations that we have so far.  let me try to get you a bit confused. So let's take a very simple example. Let's say I have a function f of xy equals x plus y. So far, it doesn't sound very confusing. And then I can write partial f of our partial x. And I think you all know how to compute it. It's going to be addressed.  l is a very happy. Now, let's do a change of variables. Let's set x equals u and y equals u plus v. It's not a very complicated change of variables, but let's do it. Then f in terms of u and v, well, so f, remember, was x plus y,  becomes u plus v, that's twice u plus v. What's partial f of a partial u? S2. So x and u are the same thing. Partial f of a partial x and partial f of a partial for you, well, unless you believe that's 1 equals 2, they're really not the same thing.  interesting slightly strange phenomenon. x equals u, but partial f, partial x, is not the same as partial f, partial for you. So how do we get rid of this contradiction? Well, we have to think a bit more about what these notations mean.  f of R partial x, it means that we are varying x, keeping y constant. When we write partial f of R  the other way around, when I do this one, I keep V constant. If I keep V constant and I change U, then why will it change? It won't be constant. So that means, well, life looked quite nice and easy with these notations. But what's dangerous about them is they're not making explicit what it is exactly that we are keeping constant.  just to write things. So here we change u and x. We have the same thing, but we keep y constant. While here we change u, which is still the same thing as x, but what we keep constant is v, or in terms of x and y that's y minus x constant.  And that's why they're not the same. So, whenever there's any risk of confusion, OK, so not in the cases that we had before, because, you know, in what we've done until now, we didn't really have any problem. But in a situation like this, to clarify things, we'll actually say explicitly what it is that we want to keep constant.  OK, so what's going to be our new notation? Well, so it's not particularly pleasant, because it uses now a subscript not to indicate what you're differentiating, but what you're holding constant. So that's quite a conflict of notation with what we had before. I think I can safely blame it on physicists or chemists.  So, this one means we keep y constant. And partial f of a partial u with V-held constant. Similarly. So, now what happens is we no longer have any contradiction. We have partial f of a partial x with,  y constant is different from partial f over partial x, with the constant, which is the same as partial f over partial to u with the constant. So this guy is 1, and this guy is R2. So now we can safely use the fact that x equals u if we are  I could have what is actually held constant. OK? So now that's going to be particularly important when we have variables that are related. Because let's say now that I have a function that depends on x, y, and z, but x, y and z are related, then it means that if I look at say x and y as my independent variables and z as a function of x and y, then it means that when I  I do partials, say, with respect to x, I will hold y constant, but I will let c very, as a function of x and y. I could do it the other way around. I could, very x, keep c constant and let y be a function of x and z. And so I will need to use this kind of notation to indicate which one I mean.  questions? No? All right, so let's try to do an example where we have a function that depends on variables that are related. So I don't want to do one with p equals n rt, because probably, I mean, if you've seen it, then you've seen too much of it. And if you haven't seen it, then maybe it's not the best example. So let's do a geometric example.  So let's look at the area of the triangle. So let's say I have a triangle and my variables will be the sides A and B and the angle here, theta. So what's the area of this triangle?  So it's 1-half of the basis A, and the height is B-sign theta. So that's a function of A, B, and theta. Now, let's say, actually, there's a relation between A, B, and theta that I didn't tell you about. Namely, actually, I want to assume that it's a right triangle.  let's now assume it's a right triangle. Let's say the hypotenuse is b. So we have the right angle here, actually. So a is here, b is here, the other is here. So, saying that it's a right triangle is the same thing as saying that a equals b cosine theta.  So that's our constraint. That's the relation between a, b and theta. And this is a function of a, b and theta. And let's say that we want to understand how the aria depends on theta.  with respect to theta. So I claim there's various answers. I can think of at least three possible answers.  So what can we possibly mean by the rate of change of A with respect to theta?  actually use different notations to distinguish them. So the first way that we actually already know about is if we just forget about the fact that the variables are related. So if we just think of little a, b, and theta as independent variables, and we just change theta, keeping a and b constant.  So that's exactly what we meant by a powerful theta. We are not putting any constant.  use some new notation, that would be the rate of change of A with respect to theta, keeping A and B fixed at the same time. Of course, if we are keeping A and B fixed and we are changing theta, it means we completely ignore this property of being a right triangle. So, in fact, it corresponds to changing the area by changing the angle, keeping these lengths fixed, and of course we lose the right angle.  at the right angle. And that one we know how to compute. Right? Because it's the one we've been computing all along. So that means we keep a and b fixed. And then, so let's see. What's the derivative of a with respect to theta? I guess it's 1-half a, b cosine theta.  So, that's one we know. Any questions? Nope. OK, if the two other guys will be more interesting. So far, I'm not really doing anything with my constraint. Let's say that actually I do want to keep a right angle. Then, when I change fader, there's two options.  a constant, and then, of course, b will have to change, because if this width stays the same, then when I change theta, the height increase, and then this side length  So that's why I say we have three different answers. So the next one is keep, I forgot which one I say it first. Let's say keep a constant. And that means that b will change.  here we know what the function is, because we can solve the constraint, namely B is A over cosine theta. But we don't actually need to know that. So that the triangle, so that the right angle, so that we keep the right angle.  And so the name we will have for this is partial A of a partial theta with A-held constant. OK? And the fact that I'm not putting B in my subscript there means that actually B will be a dependent variable. It changes in whatever way it has to change so that when theta changes, A stays the same.  And the third guy is the one where we actually keep B constant. And now, A, we think of A as a function of B and theta. And it changes so that we keep the right angle. So, actually, as a function of B and theta, it's a constant.  given over there, a equals b cosine theta. And so this guy is called partial a, of a partial theta, with b held constant. OK, so we've just defined them. We don't know yet how to compute these things. That's what we're going to do now. But is the definition, and what these things mean, is that clear to everyone?  Yes, OK, yes. OK, so the second answer, again. So one way to ask ourselves how does the aria depend on theta is to say, well, we'll actually look at the aria of a right triangle as a function of a and theta only, by solving for b.  and then will change theta, keep a constant, and ask, how does the area change? So when we do that, when we change theta and keep a the same, then b has to change, so that it stays the right triangle, right? So that this relation still holds. That requires us to change b. So when we write partial a over partial theta with a constant, it means that actually b will be the dependent variable,  it depends on a and theta, and so the area depends on theta, not only because theta is in the formula, but also because b changes and b is in the formula. Yes?  f at a little bit in this one. If I change f at a little bit, and I keep A the same, then B has to change also in some way, so that it stays the right triangle. And then, because f at and B change, that causes the area to change. So, maybe I should explain that really. So, f at change is, A is constant.  equals b cosine theta, that means that b changes. And then the question is, how does a change? Well, it will change in part because theta changes and in part because b changes. But we want to know how it depends on theta in this situation. Yes?  So I'm not going to change things. See, if I just say I have this relation, that means I have two independent variables left,  how will it change if I change theta and do random things with A and B? It depends what I do with A and B. And of course, I could choose to change them similar and easily, but then I have to specify how exactly I'm going to do that. So I think the third one, side. Ah, yes, if you wanted to, indeed, we could also change things in such a way that the third side remains constant. And that would be yet a different way to attack the problem. I mean, we don't have a good notation for this here, because we didn't give it a name.  Yeah, I mean, we could call this guy c, and then we'd have a different formula and so on. So, I'm not looking at it for simplicity, but you could have many more. In general, you will want, once you have a set of nice natural variables, you will want to look mostly at situations where one of the variable changes, some of them are held fixed, and then some dependent variable does not  whatever it must so that the constraint keeps holding. OK, so let's try to compute one of them. Let's say I decide that we'll compute this one. OK, let's see how we can compute partial A, partial theta, with A held fixed.  OK, so let's try to compute partial sums.  for a partial theta with a held constant. So let's see three different ways of doing that. So let me start with method 0. OK, it's not a real method. That's why I'm not giving it a positive number. So that one is just we solve for b and we remove b from the formulas.  here it works well because we know how to solve for b, but I'm not considering  So, how do we do that? Well, the constraint is A equals B cosine theta. That means B is A over cosine theta. Some of you know that as A second theta.  a and theta only, a is 1-half of a b cosine, sorry, a b, sine theta, is now 1-half of a squared sine theta over cosine theta, or if you prefer, 1-half of a squared tangent theta.  function of a and theta, I know what it means to take the partial derivative with respect to theta, keeping a constant. I know how to do it. So, partial a over partial theta with a held constant. Well, if a is a constant, then I get this 1 1 half a squared coming out.  times what's the derivative of tangent?  I mean, we really use the fact that we can solve for B and get rid of it. So there's two systematic methods. And let's say the basic role is that you should give both of them a chance. You should see which one you prefer, and you should be able to use one of the other on the exam.  you will actually have a choice between one or the other. It will be up to you to decide which one you want to use. But you cannot use solving in the substitution. That's not fair. OK, so the first one is to use differentials. By the way, in the notes, there are also method 1 and method 2,  I'm not promising that I have the same one. I mean, I might have one and two switched. It doesn't really matter. So how do we do things using different ones? Well, first, we know that we want to keep a fixed. And that means that we'll set dA equal to 0. OK? The second thing that we want to do is we want to look at the constraint.  The constraint is a equals b cosine theta. And we want to differentiate that. Well, differentiate the left-hand side, you get dA. And differentiate the right-hand side as a function of b and theta, you should get, well, how many db's? Well, that's right of change with respect to b. That's cosine theta db minus b sine theta.  d theta, that's a product whole, applied to B times cosine theta. So now if we have a constraint, that's relating dA, dB, and d theta. So that's actually what we did, right? That's the same sort of thing as what we did at the beginning when we related dx, dy, and dz.  So it's really the same thing, except now our variables are a, b and theta. Now we know that also we're keeping a fixed. So actually we set this equal to 0. So we have 0 equals d a equals cosine theta d b minus b sine theta d theta. That means that actually we know how to solve for d b. OK? So cosine theta d b,  b equals b-sign theta, b theta, or db is b tangent theta, the theta. OK, so in fact, what we found, if you want, is the rate of change of b with respect to theta. Why do we care? Well, we care because let's look now at dA.  the function that we want to look at. So the function is a equals 1-half a b sine theta. Well, then d a, so we have to use the product whole carefully, or we use the partials. So the coefficient of d little a will be partial respect to little a. That's 1-half b sine theta d a plus coefficient of d b,  will be 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1. So, in fact, we will be 1 1 1 1 1. So, in fact, we will be 1 1 1 1 1.  a as a function of theta. So, well, maybe we actually want to use this formula for dB that we found in here. And then we'll be left only with d thetas, which is what we want.  So, if we plug this one into that one, we get, in fact, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1  dA equals 1-half A sine theta times B-tension theta, d theta, plus 1-half AB cosine theta, d theta. And if we collect these things together, we get 1-half of A B times sine theta times c.  is tangent theta plus cosine theta, d theta. And if you know your trick, then you will see that this is sine square over cosine plus cosine square over cosine. That's the same as second theta. So now you have expressed dA as something times d theta. Well, that coefficient is the rate of change of A with respect to theta.  with the understanding that we are keeping A fixed, and letting B vary as a dependent variable. I have not enough space, so right? OK, in case it's clearer for you, let's think about it backwards.  So we wanted to find how a changes. We write dA. But now this tells us how a depends on little a, little b, and theta. Well, we know actually we want to keep little a constant. So we set this to be 0. Theta, well, we are very happy because we want to express things in terms of theta. db, we want to get rid of. How do we get rid of db? Well, we do that by,  by figuring out how b depends on the fader when a is fixed. And we do that by different shading the constraint equation and setting dA equal to 0. OK, so we, I guess, to summarize the method.  terms of dA, dB, dtheta, then we say that A is constant. Means we set dA equals 0. And the third thing is that because, well, we differentiate the constraint.  can solve for dB in terms of the fader. And then we plug into dA, and we get the answer.  So here's another method, to do the same thing differently, is to use the chain rule. So we can use the chain rule with dependent variables. So what does the chain rule tell us? The chain rule tells us, so we will want to differentiate the formula for A, which is,  we have respect to theta, holding A constant. So I claim, well, what does the chain rule tell us? It tells us that, well, when we change things, A changes because of the changes in the variables. So part of it is that A depends on theta and theta changes. How fast does theta change? Well, you could call that the rate of change of theta  we respect to theta with a constant. But, of course, how fast does theta depend on itself? The answer is 1. So that's pretty easy. Plus, then we have this, the partial derivative, the formal partial derivative of a with respect to little a times the rate of change of a in our situation. Well, how does little a change if a is constant? Well, it doesn't change.  And then there's a sub little b, the formal partial derivative, times, sorry, the rate of change of b. And how do we find this one? Well, here we have to use the constraint. And we can find this one from the constraint,  seen at the beginning, either by differentiating the constraint or by using the chain role on the constraint. So, of course, the calculations are exactly the same. See, this is the same formula as the one over there, just dividing everything by partial theta and with subscripts little a. But if you, if it's easier for you to think about it this way, then that's also valid.  So tomorrow we are going to review for the test. So I'm going to tell you a bit more about this also as we go over one practice