 The following content is provided under a Creative Commons license. Your support will help MIT OpenCourseWare continue to offer high-quality educational resources for free. To make a donation or to view additional materials from hundreds of MIT courses, visit MIT OpenCourseWare at ocw.mit.edu.  I mean, in terms of x and y coordinates. So we've defined the double integral of a region in plane of a function f of xy dA. You can hear me. OK, is the sound working. Can you hear me at the back now? Can we make the sound louder? Does this work?  at the back. Is it better? People are still saying make it louder. Is it better? Great. Thanks. So, OK, that's not an excuse to start, you know, chatting with your friends. OK, so when we have a region in the xy plane, and we have a function of x and y,  We are defining the double-integral of f over this region, by taking basically the sum of values of a function, if I were in here, times the area element. And the definition actually is we split the region into lots of tiny little pieces. We multiply the value of the function at that point times the area of a little piece, and we sum that everywhere.  as I direct integrals, so first, integrating over dy, then over dx, are the other way around. So, one example that we did, in particular, was to compute the double integral of a quarter disk,  the region where x squared plus y squared is less than 1, and x and y are positive. Of 1 minus x squared minus y squared dA. And well, hopefully I kind of convinced you that we can do it using enough trig and substitutions and so on. But it's not very pleasant. And the reason for that is that using x and y coordinates here doesn't seem very appropriate.  use polar coordinates instead to compute this to a voluntary goal. So, remember that polar coordinates are about replacing x and y as coordinates for a point in the plane by instead R, which is the distance from the origin to the  point and theta, which is the angle, measured countercluster-quies from the positive x-axis. OK, so in terms of R and theta, you have x equals R cosine theta, y equals R sine theta. So the claim is we are able, actually, to do double integrals in polar coordinates, we just have to learn how to  So, just to draw a quick picture, when we were integrating in xy coordinates, in rectangular coordinates, we were slicing our region by red lines that were over horizontal or vertical, and we used that to set up the iterated integral. And we said dA became dxdy or dy dx.  integrate in terms of the polar coordinates R and the other. So let's say we will integrate in the order, well, R first and then the other. That's the order that makes the most sense, usually, when you do polar coordinates. So what does that mean? It means that we will first focus on a slice where we fix the value of the other.  And we'll let R vary, so that means we fix a direction, we fix a ray out from the origin, in a certain direction. And we'll travel along this ray and see which part of it, which values of R, are in our region. OK, so here it will be actually pretty easy, because R will just, well, start at 0, and you'll have to stop when you actually exit this quadratic disk.  or in polar coordinates, it's just R equals 1. So we'll start when R, which is 1. OK. What about theta? Well, the first ray that we might want to consider is the one that goes along the x-axis. That's when theta equals 0, and we'll stop when theta, which is pi over 2, because we don't care about the rest of the disk. We only care about the first quadrant.  So we'll stop at pi over 2. Now there's a catchful, which is that dA is not dr. Thetheta. So let me explain to you why. So let's say that we are slicing, what it means really, is that we are cutting our region into little pieces that are the elementary. What corresponds to a small rectangle in the x, y-coordinate system here would be actually a little,  piece of circle, between a given radius R and R plus delta R, and between an angle theta and theta plus delta theta. OK, so I need to draw actually a bigger picture of that, because it makes it really hard to read. So let's say that I fix an angle theta, and a slightly different one where I've added delta theta.  that with. And let's say that I have a radius R, and I add delta R to it. So then, I'll have a little piece of xy-plane that's in here, and I have to figure out what is its area, what is delta A for this guy. Well, let's see.  now, my delta R and delta theta are small enough. It will almost look like a rectangle. It's rotated, but it's basically a rectangle. I mean, these sides, of course, are curvy. But if they're short enough, it's almost right. So the R here should be this length times that length. Well, what's this length? That one is easy.  So what about that length? Well, it's not delta theta. It's something slightly different. It's a piece of a circle of radius R corresponding to angle delta theta. So it's R delta theta. So, times R delta theta. OK, so that means now, even if we shrink things and take smaller and smaller regions,  is going to be R dr dtheta. OK, so that's an important thing to remember. When you integrate in polar coordinates, you just set up your bounds in terms of R and theta, but you replace dA by R dr dtheta, not just dr dtheta. And then, of course, we have some function that we're integrating. Let's say that I call that thing f.  then it's the same f that I put up here. So concretely, how do I do it here? Well, my function f was given as 1 minus x2 minus y squared, and I like to switch that to polar coordinates. I want to put R and theta in there. Well, I have formulas for x and y in polar coordinates, so I could just replace x squared  by R square cosine square theta, y squared by R square sine square theta. And that works just fine. But maybe you can observe that this is actually, this is x squared plus y squared. It's just the square of a distance from the origin. So that's just R squared. That's a useful thing. If you don't strictly need it, but it's much faster if you see this right away. Saves you writing down the sine and the cosine.  So now we just end up with the integral from 0 to pi over 2, integral from 0 to 1, of 1 minus R squared R dr d theta. Now, if I want to compute this integral, so let's first do the inner integral.  So if I integrate R minus R cubed, I will get R squared over 2 minus R squared over 4, between 0 and 1, then I will integrate the fator. So what is this equal to? Well, for R equals 1, you get 1-half minus a quarter. That's going to be just a quarter. And when you plug 0, you get 0. So it's the integral from 0 to pi over 2.  of 1-quarter dtheta, and that just integrates to the quarter of pi over 2, which is pi over 8. OK? So that's a lot easier than the way we did it yesterday. Now, well, here we were lucky. OK? I mean, usually you will switch to polar coordinates, either because the region is easier to set up.  up because, see, the bounds became very simple. We don't have that square root of 1 minus x squared anymore. Or, because the integrant becomes much simpler, here, our function, well, it's not very complicated in x, y coordinates, but it's even simpler in our beta coordinates. So here we were very lucky. In general, there's maybe a trade-off. Maybe it will be easier to set up the bounds, but maybe the function will become harder because it will have all these signs and cosines in it. If our function had been  just x. x is very easy in xy coordinates. Here it becomes r cosine theta. That means you will have a little bit of trick to do in the integral, not a very big one, but not very complicated integral, but imagine it could get potentially much harder. OK, so anyway, that's the whole integral in polar coordinates. And the way that you set up the bounds in general,  is, so in 99% of the cases, you will integrate over R first. So what you will do is you will look for a given fader. What are the bounds for R to be in the region? What is the portion of my ray that's in the given region? And then you will put the bounds for fader. Conceptually, it's the same as before, just instead of slicing horizontally or vertically, we slice radially. So we'll do more examples in a bit.  Any questions about this original method? Yes? What you say, computing the rectangle with the small and small interval, series when you use R, R to the data, so R plus L1 R. So that's a very good question. OK. Yes, why do I measure the length inside, instead of outside?  This one. So here, I say this side is R delta theta. I could have said, actually, R delta theta is the length here. Here, it's a slightly more. R plus delta R times delta theta. But if delta R is very small compared to R, then that's almost the same thing. And this is an approximation anyway. So I took this one because it gives me the simpler formula. If you want, if you take the limit as delta R tends to 0, then the two things become the same anyway.  OK, the length, you know, whether you put R or R plus delta R, and here doesn't matter anymore. If you imagine that this guy is infinitely small, then really the lengths become the same. OK, we'll also see another proof of this formula using changes of variables next week. But, I mean, hopefully this is at least slightly convincing. OK, more questions?  So, let's see. So, we've seen how to compute double integrals. I have to tell you what they are good for as well. So, the definition we saw yesterday, and motivation was in terms of finding volumes. OK, but that's not going to be our main preoccupation because, you know,  in volumes is fun, but it's not all there is to life. And you're doing single integrals. When you do single integrals, it's usually not to find the aria of some region of the plane. It's for something else, usually. So the way we actually think of the double integral is really as summing the values of a function all over this region. So we can use that to get information about maybe the region or about the average value of a function in that region and so on.  about various uses of double integrals. So the first one that I will mention is actually something you thought maybe you could do with a simple integral, with a single integral. But it's useful very often to do it as a double integral. It's to find the area of a given region, OK?  some region in the plane, and you want to know just its area. So in various cases, you could set this up as a simple integral. But often, it could be useful to set it up as a double integral. So how do you express the area as a double integral? Well, the area of this region is the sum of the areas of all the little pieces. So it means you want to sum 1 dA over the entire region.  So the area of R is the double integral of R, of a function 1. So one way to think about it, if you're really still attached to the idea of double integral is a volume, what this measures is the volume below the graph of a function 1.  would be the volume of a prism, or with base R and height 1. And the volume of that, of course, would be base times height, so it would just be the area of R again. But we don't actually even need to think about it that way. Really, what we're doing is we're summing dA over the entire region. A related thing we can do, so imagine that actually this is,  is, you know, some objects, some physical object. And it's got to be a flat object, because we are just dealing with things in the plane so far. But, you know, you have a flat metal plate or something, and you would like to know it's mass. While it's mass is the sum of the masses of everything, every single little piece. And so you would get that by integrating the density. The density for a flat object would be the area, sorry, the mass per unit area.  So, I can get the mass of, well, flat objects.  So, each little piece of your object will have a mass, which will be just the density, times its area for each small piece. And you will get the total mass by summing these things. So, the mass will be the double integral of the density times the area element.  then, of course, you could just take the density out, and you will get density times the total area. And if you know that it's always the same material. But if, actually, it has varying density, maybe because it's some metallic thing, but with various metals or with varying thickness, or something, then you can still get the mass by integrating the density. So, I mean, of course, looking at flat objects might be a little bit strange.  if your weeks will be doing triple integrals, and then we'll be able to do solids in space.  value of some quantity in a region. So what does it mean to take the average value of some function f in this region R? Well, you know what's the average of a finite set of data. For example, if I ask you to compute your average score on 18 or 2 problem sets, you would just take the scores, add them up and divide by the number of problem sets.  What if there's infinitely many things? Because, you know, there ask you to find the average temperature in this room, where you would have to measure the temperature everywhere, and then add all of these together and divide by the number of data points. But depending on how careful you are, actually, there's potentially infinitely many points to look at. So the mathematical way to define the average over a continuous set of data is that you actually integrate the function of the entire set of data.  and then you divide by the size of the sample, which is just the area of the region. So, in fact, the average of f. So, the notation we'll use usually for that is f with a bar on top, to tell us the average f. So, we say it will take the integral of f,  x by the R here of the region. You can really think of it as the sum of the values of f, everywhere, divided by the number of points in everywhere. And so that's an average where everything is actually equally likely. That's a uniform average, where all the points in the region, all the little pieces of the region, are equally likely.  want to do, say, an average of R some solid with variable density, or if you want to somehow give more importance to certain parts than two others, then you could actually do a weighted average. So what's a weighted average? Well, in the case of taking the average of your problem sets, if I tell you well problems that one is worth twice as much as the others, then you would count twice that score in the sum, and then you would divide, you would  count it as two, of course, when you divide. So the weighted average is the sum of the values that each weighted by a certain coefficient, and then you will divide by the sum of the weights. So it's a bit of the same idea as when we replace aria by some mass that tells you how important a given piece is. So we'll actually have a density. Let's call it delta again.  So what would be now, well, we'll see what we divide by. But what we will take is the integral times of a function, times the density, times the area element. Because this would correspond to the mass element telling us how to weight the various points of our region. And then we would divide by the total weight, which is the mass of the region. So as defined up there.  So, you know, if the density is uniform, then, of course, the density gets out and, you know, you can simplify and reduce to that, if all the points are equally likely. OK, so why is that important? Well, that's important for various applications, but one that you might have seen in physics, we care about maybe where is the center of mass of a given object.  is basically the point, you would call that point to be, you would say that point is right in the middle of the object. But of course, if the object has a very strange shape, or if somehow part of it is heavier than the rest, then that takes a very different meaning. So, strictly speaking, the center of mass of a solid is the point where you would have to concentrate all the mass if you wanted it to behave equivalently from the point of view of mechanics, if you are trying to do translations,  object, if you are going to push that object, that would be really where the equivalent point mass would lie. The other way to think about it, if I have a flat object, then the center of mass is basically the point where I would need to hold it so that it's perfectly balanced. And of course, I can do this because I'm not, well, whatever, but you get the feeling. I mean, the center of mass of this eraser is somewhere in the middle. And so in principle,  that's why I would have to put my finger for it to stay. Well, and it doesn't work. OK, but that's where the center of mess should be. I think it should be in the middle. So, well, maybe I should call this 3. I should call this maybe 2a or whatever.  So, how do we find the center of MASS of a flat object with density delta? Well, so if you have your object in the xy plane, then its center of MASS will be,  at positions that are actually just the coordinates of the center of mass, will just be the weighted averages of x and y on the solid. OK, so the center of mass will be at a position that I will call x bar, y bar, and these are really just the average values of x and of y in the solid. So, just to give you a formula, again, x bar would be one of other mass  times the double integral of x times density dA. And same thing with y. y-bar is the weighted average of y-coordinate in your region. So you see if you take a region that's symmetric and has uniform density, that will just give you the center of the way  or the region. But if the region has a strange shape, or if the density is not homogeneous, if parts of it are heavier, then you will get whatever the weighted average will be. And that would be the point where this thing would be balanced if you were trying to balance it on a pole or on your finger.  OK. Any questions so far?  Yes? Yes? When you do that, I will go over here. The inner one is 1, R1 is 1. OK? I'm sorry. So here, I set up this. I didn't set this up as an iterated integral yet. OK? So here, the function that I'm integrating is x times delta, where delta, you know, the density will be given to me, maybe, as a function of x and y.  And then I will integrate this dA. And dA could mean dx, dy. Could mean dy dx. Could mean R dr the freighter. I will choose how to set it up depending maybe on the shape of the region. If my solid is actually just going to be round, then I might want to use polar coordinates. If it's a square, I might want to use xy coordinates. If it's more complicated, well, I will choose depending on how I feel about it.  Yes, so delta is the density. It's in general, it's a function of x and y. If you imagine that your solid is not homogeneous, then its density will depend on which piece of it you're looking at. Of course, to compute this, you need to know the density. If you have a problem asking you to find the center of mass of something, and you have no information about the density, assume it's uniform, take the density to be a constant. Even take it to be a 1, that's even easier if you want.  fact of math, we don't care about units. So then certainly, if density is constant, we might as well take it to be 1, and that just means that our mass unit becomes the area unit. Yes?  are a range of theta. See, for example, take a disk center that we are origin. Well, you know that the center of mass should be at the origin. Right? But the average of R is certainly not 0, because R is positive everywhere. So that doesn't work. You cannot get the polar coordinates of the center of mass just by taking the average of R and the average of theta. By the way, what's the average of theta? If you take theta to go from 0 to 2 pi, the average theta will be pi, you should take it to go from minus pi to pi, the average theta will be 0.  So there's a problem there. So that actually just doesn't work. So we really have to compute x bar and y bar. But still we could compute them, we could set this up and then switch to polar coordinates to evaluate this integral. But we'd still be computing the average values of x and y. OK. So the next thing, so we're basically re-explanating  you know, mechanics and motion of solids here. So, the next thing is moment of inertia. So, just to remind you, or in case you somehow haven't seen it in physics yet, so the moment of inertia is basically to rotation of the solid, what the mass is to translation. In the following sense, the mass of the solid is what makes it hard to put in the picture.  and push it, how hard it is to throw something is related to its mess. How hard it is to spin something, on the other hand, is given by its moment of inertia. Maybe I should write this down. So, mess is how it is to impart a translation motion to a solid.  f and c worlds to the end. And the moment of inertia, so the difference with the mess is that the moment of inertia is defined about some axis. OK, so you choose an axis, then you will try to measure how hard it is to spin your object around that axis. For example, I can try to measure how hard it is to spin this sheet of paper about an axis that's in the center of it. So, we'll try to spin it like that and see how much I thought about it.  I have to make for a sheet of paper, not very much. So that would measure the same thing, but it would be rotation, motion about that axis. So maybe some of you know the definition.  if not, I'm going to try to derive it again. I'm sorry that it won't be quite as detailed as the way you've probably seen it in physics, but I'm not trying to replace your physics teachers. I'm sure they're doing a great job. So what's the idea for the definition to find a formula for a moment of inertia? So the idea is to think about kinetic energy. Kinetic energy is really what, when you push something or when you try to make it move, you have to provide some energy to it.  it, then it has kinetic energy. And if you have a right device, then you can convert back that kinetic energy into something else. So if you try to look at the kinetic energy of a point mass, so you'll have something with mass M going at the velocity V, well, that will be 1-half of a mass times the square of a speed. Hopefully, you've all seen that formula.  some time before. Now, let's say that instead of just trying to push this mass, I'm going to make it spin around something. OK, so instead of just like somewhere, maybe I will have here the origin, and I'm trying to actually make it go around the origin at a certain, you know, in a circle, at a certain angular velocity.  m at distance R, let's call R this distance. And angular velocity, omega, I think that's what physicists call it. So remember, the angular velocity is just the rate of change of the angle of our time.  OK, well, what's the kinetic energy now? Well, first we have to find out what's the speed. What's the speed? Well, if we are going on the circle of radius R at angular velocity, omega, that means that in unit time we're rotated by omega and we go by a distance of R times omega. OK? So the actual speed is the radius times the angular velocity.  The kinetic energy is 1 1 over m V squared, which is 1 1 1 R squared, omega S. And so, by similarity with that formula, we can think of. So here, the coefficient of V squared is the mass. And here we'll say the coefficient of omega squared, so this thing, is the moment of inertia. That's how we define the moment of inertia.  OK, now that's only for a point mass. And it's kind of fun to spin, just in a small bowl, but maybe you'd like to spin actually a larger solid and try to define this moment of inertia.  of inertia of a solid will be just the sum of the moments of inertia of all the little pieces. So what we'll do is we'll just cut our solid into little chunks and we'll sum this thing for each little piece. So for a solid with density, delta, so each little piece has mass,  x, which is the density times the amount of area, which is equal, actually. And the moment of inertia, that small portion of the solid will be delta M, the small mass, times r squared, the square of the distance to the center, to the axis, around which I'm spinning. So that means if I sum these things together,  well, so has a moment of inertia. delta M times R squared, which is R squared times the density, times delta A. And so I will be summing these things together. And so the moment of inertia about the origin will be the double integral of R squared times density times dA.  OK, so the final question.  for the moment of inertia about the origin, is the double integral of the region of R-squared density dA. If you prefer, if you're going to do it in xy coordinates, of course, R-square becomes x square plus y squared, it's the square of the distance from the origin.  So when you integrate this, that tells you how hard it is to spin that solid about the origin. So the motion that we try to do, we keep this fixed, and then we just rotate around the origin. Well, sorry, that's a pretty bad picture. Hopefully, you get what I mean. And then the rotational energy, so the name we use for that is I0.  Kinetic energy is 1-half times this moment of inertia, times the square of the angular velocity. So it's in this sense that this replaces the mass for rotation motions. OK. What about other kinds of rotations?  So in particular, here we've been rotating things about just a point in the plane. What you could imagine also is, instead, you have your solid. So what I've done so far is I've skewered it this way, and I'm rotating around the axis. Instead, I could skewer it through, say, the horizontal axis, and then I could try to spin about the horizontal axis.  would you know, rotate in space in that direction, like that. So let's say we do rotation about the x-axis. Well, the idea would still be the same. OK, the moment of inertia for any small piece of the solid would be its mass element.  x times the square of the distance to the axis, because that will be the radius of the trajectory. If you take this point here, it's going to go on a circle like that, centered on the x-axis. So the radius will just be this distance here. Well, what's this distance? It's just y, or maybe absolute value of y.  x to x axis is absolute value of y. And what we actually care about is the square of the distance. So, it will just be y squared. So, the moment of inertia about the x axis is going to be obtained by integrating y squared, times the mass element.  about the x-axis, but if you think about it, why it tells me how far I am from the x-axis, so how hard it will be to spin around the x-axis. OK, and I could do the same about any other axis that I want, just I would have to sum the square of the distance to the axis of rotation. OK, so maybe I should do an example. Yes?  x. Oh, sorry, same thing as above. Distance to the x-axis. Because that's what we care about, right? For the moment of inertia, we want the square of the distance to the axis of rotation. OK, so let's do an example. Let's try to figure out if we have just a uniform disk.  and I'm going to find it around its center. So that should not be very hard to figure out.  let's say that it's of uniform density, and let's take just the density to be 1, so that we don't really care about the density. So what's the moment of inertia of that? Well, we have to integrate over our disk R squared times the density, which is 1, times dA. OK, what's R squared? So you have here to resist the urge to say, oh, the radius is just a. We know the radius is a.  no, it's not a, because we're looking at rotation of any point inside this disk. And when you're inside the disk, for distance to the origin, it's less than a. It's actually anything between 0 and a. So just to point out the pitfall, R here is really a function on this disk, and we're going to integrate that function. Don't plug R equals a just yet. OK, what coordinates do we use to compute this integral?  are really polar coordinates. I mean, unless you want to repeat of what happens, already with x and y. So that will tell us we want to integrate R square times R dr the theta. And the bounds for R, well, R will go from 0 to A, no matter in which direction I go from the origin, if I fix theta, R goes from 0 to R equals A. The part of this way that lives inside the disk,  is always from 0 to A. And the theta goes from, well, 0 to 2 pi, for example. OK? And now you can compute this integral. Well, I'll let you figure it out. But the inner integral becomes a to the 4 over 4, and the outer multiplies things by 2 pi. So you get pi a to the 4 over 2. No, yes.  OK, so that's how hard it is to spin this disk. Now, what about, instead of spinning it about the center, we decide actually to spin it about a point on the circumference. So for example, think of a frisbee. Frisbee has this rim, and so you can actually try to make it rotate around the point on the circumference by holding it near the remnants, spinning it there. How much harder is that around the center?  well, we'll try to compute now the moment of inertia about this point. So we have two options. One is we keep the system of coordinates centered here, but then the formula for distance to this point becomes harder. The other option, which is the one I will choose, is to change the coordinates so that this point becomes the origin. OK, so let's do that.  OK, so about a point on the theorem,  what I would have to do, maybe, is set up my region like that. Now, I've moved the origin so that it's on the second of the disk, and I will, again, try to find the moment of inertia of this disk about the origin. So it's still that the bolentine of R squared,  dA. But now I want to find out how to set up the integral. So I could try to use xy coordinates, and it would work. Or I can use polar coordinates, and actually it works a little bit better that way. But both are doable. So let's say I do it this way. So I have to figure out how to set them by bounds, right? So what are the bounds for R?  well, if I fix a value of theta, so it means I chose an angle here, and now I'm shooting a ray from the origin in that direction. So I enter my region at R equals 0, but hasn't changed. Question is, where do I exit the region? So what is that distance?  maybe not. So let's see. Actually, I should have written down the radius of the circle is a. So this distance here is 2a. So if you draw this segment in here, you know that here you have a right angle. So you have a right triangle. The hypotenuse here has length 2a.  well, this length is 2a cosine theta. So the polar coordinates equation of this circle,  in the distance. Now, what are the bounds for theta? It's not quite 0 to 2 pi, because actually, you see in this direction, if I shoot or I in this direction, I will never meet my region. So I have to actually think a bit more. Well, the directions in which I will actually hit my circle are all the directions in the right half of the plane. OK, I mean, of course, if I shoot very close to the axis, you might think, oh, I will actually  won't be in there, but actually that's not true, because here, the circle is tangent to the axis. So no matter which direction I take, I will still have little tiny piece. So the angle actually goes from minus pi over 2 to pi over 2. So now if you compute that, you will get, well, the inner integral will be R to the 4 over 4 between 0 and 2 a cosine theta, which will turn out to be  for a to the for cosine to the for theta. And now you will integrate that from minus pi over 2 to pi over 2. And, well, that's, again, the evil integral that we had yesterday. So, either we remember the method from yesterday, or we remember from yesterday that, actually, there's formulas in the notes to help you. So, on homework, you can use this formula in the notes.  for a b, there's formulas for these particular kinds of integrals. And that will end up being three halves of pi a to the 4. So in case you wanted to know, it's three times harder to spend a phrase b about a point in the circumference than around the center. See, we got three times the moment of inertia about the center. OK, that's it.