 The following content is provided under a Creative Commons license. Your support will help MIT OpenCourseWare continue to offer high-quality educational resources for free. To make a donation or to view additional materials from hundreds of MIT courses, visit MIT OpenCourseWare at ocw.mit.edu. So let's start right away with stuff that we will need to see before we can go on through more advanced things.  you've heard a bit about vectors, how many of you actually knew about vectors before that? OK, that's the vast majority. If you're not one of those people, well, hopefully you will learn about vectors right now. I'm sorry that the learning curve will be a bit steeper for the first week, but hopefully you will adjust fine. If you have trouble with vectors, do go to your instructors, recitation instructors, or this house for,  you know, extra practice if you feel the need to. You'll see it's pretty easy. So, just to remind you, a vector is a quantity that has both a direction and a magnitude or length.  So, concretely, the way you draw a vector is by some a-hole like that. OK? And so it has a length and it's pointing in some direction. And so, now, the way that we compute things with vectors typically is we introduce a coordinate system. So, if we're in the plane xy axis, if we're in space xyz axis, so, usually, I will try to draw,  my x y z axis consistently to look like this. And then I can represent my vector in terms of its components along the coordinate axis. So that means, when I have this arrow, I can ask, how much does it go in the x direction? How much does it go in the y direction? How much does it go in the z direction? And so, for example, let's call this a vector a. So a small convention, when we have a vector quantity, we put an arrow on top,  to remind us that it's a vector. If it's in a textbook, then sometimes it's in bold because it's easier to typeset. If you've tried in your favorite what processor, those bold is easy and vectors are not easy. So the vector, you can try to decompose in terms of unit vectors directed along the coordinate axis. So the convention is there's a vector that we call,  at that points along the x-axis and has length 1, there's a vector called j-hat that does the same along the y-axis and the k-hat that does the same along the z-axis. And so we can express any vector in terms of its components. So the other notation is a1, a2, a3 between these square brackets.  well, maybe if it's an angular block it. So the length of a vector we denote by, if you want, it's the same notation as the absolute value. So that's going to be a number, as we say now, a scalar quantity. So a scalar quantity is a usual numerical quantity as opposed to a vector quantity.  is sometimes called the R of A, and that can be obtained just by scaling the vector down to unit length, for example, by dividing it by its length.  should be learned. So, for example, if I have two points, p and Q, then I can draw a vector from p to Q, and that vector is called vector pQ. So maybe I will call it A, but a vector does not really have necessarily a starting point and an ending point. So, if I decide to start here, and I go by the same distance in the same direction, this is also the vector A.  So, a lot of vectors will draw starting at the origin, but we don't have to. OK? So, let's just check and see how things went in recitation. So, let's say that I give you the vector 3 to 1. And so, what do you think about the lengthful?  of this vector. OK, I see an answer for m. So a lot of you are answering the same thing. Maybe I shouldn't spoil it for those who haven't done it yet. OK, I think the overwhelming vote is in flavor of answer number 2.  I see some 6s, I don't know. That's a perfectly good answer, too. But hopefully, in a few minutes, it won't be, I don't know anymore. So let's see.  along the x-axis by three units, it goes to the right, along the y-axis, by two units, and then it goes up by one unit along the z-axis. OK, so it's pointing towards here. That's pretty hard to draw. So how do we get its length? Well, maybe we can start with something easier, the length of a vector in the plane.  that A is obtained from a vector B in the plane, let's say B equals 3 I had, plus 2j had, and then we just have to still go up by one unit. OK? So let me try to draw a picture in this vertical plane that contains A and B. If I draw it in the vertical plane, so that's the z-axis. That's not any particular axis. Then, my vector B,  will go here, and my vector A will go above it, and here that's one unit, and here I have the right angle. So I can use the Pythagorean theorem to find that length A squared equals length B squared plus 1.  So in length of B we can again find, using the Pythagorean theorem, in the xy plane, because here we have the right angle, here we have three units and here we have two units. So if you do the calculations, you will see that, well, length of B is square root of 3 squared plus 2 squared, that's 13, so square root of 13.  length of a is a square root of length b squared plus 1, if you want, which is going to be square root of 13 plus 1, is a square root of 14. Hence, answer number two, which almost all of you gave. OK, so the general formula, if you follow what we did, in general,  if we have a vector with components a1, a2, a3, then the length of a is the square root of a1 squared plus a2 squared plus a3 squared. OK, any questions about that? Yes?  we indeed can consider vectors in abstract spaces that have any number of coordinates, and then you have more components. In this class we'll mostly see vectors with two or three components only, because they are easier to draw, and because a lot of the map that we'll see works exactly the same way, whether you have three variables or a million variables. If we had a vector with more components, then we would have a lot of trouble drawing it, but we could still define its length in the same way by summing the squares of the components.  So I'm sorry to say that here, you know, multi-variable, multi will mean, mostly, two or three. But be assured that it works just the same way if you have 10,000 variables. Just calculations are longer. OK, more questions?  how to do with vectors is to add them or to scale them. So vector addition, so if you have two vectors, A and B, then you can form them, there's some A plus B. How do we do that? Well, first, I should tell you vectors, we have this double life.  in pictures and fair also computational objects, but we can represent by numbers. So every question about vectors will have two answers, one geometric and one numerical. So let's start with a geometry. So let's say that I have two vectors, A and B, given to me. And let's say that I thought of drawing them at the same place to start with. Well, to take the sum, what I should do is actually move B so that it starts at the end.  and of A, at the head of A. So this is again vector B. So observe this actually forms now a parelogram. So this side is again vector A. And now if we take the diagonal of that parelogram, this is what we call A plus B. So the idea being that to move along A plus B,  it's the same as to move first along a and then along B. A plus B equals B plus A. Now, if we do it numerically, then all you do is you just add the first component of A with the first component of B, the second with the second and the third with the third.  to a3, b was b1, b2, b3, then you just add this way. So it's pretty straight for what. So, for example, I say that my vector over there, its components are 3 to 1, but I also wrote it as 3 times i plus 2 times j plus k. What does that mean? So I need to tell you first about multiplying by a scalar.  So maybe I should say this is about addition. So multiplication by a scalar, it's very easy. If you have a vector A, then you can form a vector 2a just by making it go twice as far in the same direction. Or we can make half A, a number, this thing. Or we can even make a minus A, and so on.  So now you see if I do the calculation, 3 times i plus 2 times j plus k, well, what does it mean? 3 times i is just going to go along the x-axis, but by distance of 3 instead of 1. And then 2 times j goes two units along the y-axis, and k goes up by one unit. Well, if you add these together, you will go from the origin, then along the x-axis, then parallel to the y-axis and then up,  up, indeed, at the end point of a vector I. OK, any questions at this point? Yes?  OK, any other questions? Yes? So I'm just writing you just for 1 and M. That's correct. If you subtract two vectors, that just means you add the opposite of a vector. So for example, if I wanted to do A minus B, I would first go along A and then along minus B, which would take me somewhere over there. OK? So A minus B, if you want, would go from here to here.  OK, so well, hopefully you've kind of seen that stuff either before in your lives or at least yesterday. So I'm going to use that as an excuse to move quickly for world. So now we're going to learn a few more operations about vectors.  operations will be useful to us when we start trying to do a bit of geometric. So, of course, you've all done some geometry, but we're going to see that geometric can be done using vectors. And, actually, in many ways, it's the right language for that. And, in particular, when we learn about functions, we really will want to use vectors more than maybe the other kind of geometric that you've seen before. And, of course, it's just a language in a way.  already know, since childhood, but you'll see that the notation somehow helps to make it maybe more straightforward. So what is dot product? Well, dot product is a way of multiplying two vectors to get a number, a scalar. And, well, let me start by giving you a definition in terms of components. So what we do, let's say that we have a vector A with components A1, A2, A2,  x is a 3, a vector B with components, B1, B2, B3, well, we multiply the first component by the first component, the second by the third, if you have n components you keep going, and you sum all of these together. And important, this is a scalar. You do not get a vector.  from the definition here, but in the middle of action, when you're going to do complicated problems, it's sometimes easy to forget. So that's a definition. What is it good for? Why would we ever want to do that? That's kind of a strange operation. So probably to see what it's good for, I should first tell you what it does geometrically. So what does it do geometrically?  well, what you do when you multiply two vectors in this way, I claim the answer is equal to the length of A times the length of B, times the cosine of the angle between them. So, if I have my vector A,  are B, and I have some angle between them, I multiply the length of A times the cosine of that angle. So that looks like a very artificial operation. I mean, why would we want to do that complicated multiplication? Well, the basic answer is it tells us at the same time about lengths and about angles. And the extra bonus thing is that it's very easy to compute. If you have a components, see, that formula is actually  that it is easy. OK, maybe I should first tell you how do we get this from that? Because, you know, in math, one tries to justify everything to prove Theorems. So, if you want that's a theorem. That's the first theorem in 1802. So, how do we prove that theorem? How do we check that this is, indeed, correct, using this definition? So, in Markleman language, we have a natural number,  what does this geometric definition mean? Well, the first thing it means, before we multiply two vectors, let's start multiplying a vector with itself.  what this tells us is we should get the same thing as multiplying the length of A with itself, so squared, times the cosine of the angle, but now the cosine of an angle of 0, cosine of 0, you all know, is 1. OK, so that's going to be length A squared.  a1 squared plus a2 squared plus a3 squared, that is,  a and b, and I want to try to understand what's going on. So my claim is that we are going to be able to understand the relation between the n sub n that in terms of the lower cosines. So the lower cosines is something that tells you about the length of the third side in the triangle like this in terms of these two sides.  and the angle here. So the law of cosines, which hopefully you have seen before, says that, so let me give a name to this side. Let's call this side c. And as a vector, c is a minus b.  let's get into a bit closer here. So the law of cosines says that the length of the third side in this triangle is equal to the length a squared plus length b squared.  is length a, length b cosine theta. Has everyone seen this formula? Sometime? Yeah? No? I hear some years. I hear some gnolls. Well, it's a fact about, I mean, you probably haven't seen it with vectors, but it's a fact about the side lengths in a triangle. And, well, I'm not sure that I, well, let's say if you haven't seen it before, then this is going to be,  a proof of the law of cosine, if you believe this, otherwise it's the other way around. So let's try to see how this relates to what I'm saying about the dot product. So I've been saying that length c squared, that's the same thing as c.c. OK, that we have checked.  c.c, well, c is a minus b. So it's a minus b, dot product, a minus b. What do we want to do in a situation like that? Well, we want to expand this into a sum of four terms. Are we allowed to do that? Well, we have this dot product. It's a mysterious new operation. We don't really know. Well, the answer is, yes, we can do it. You can check from this definition that it behaves in the usual way in terms of,  expanding, factoring, and so on. So I can write that as a.a minus a.b minus b.a plus b.b. So a.a is length a squared. Let me jump ahead to the last term, b.b is length b squared.  And then, these two terms, well, they are the same. You can check from the definition that a.b or b.a are the same thing. So, there's no hidden trick here. This is really minus twice a.b. OK? So, now, let's compare these two formulals. Well, you see that this term is, I mean, this is the only difference between these two formulals for the length of c.  So if you believe in the law of cosines, then it tells you that, yes, this is a proof that a.b equals, length a, length b cosine theta. Or, this versa, if you have never seen the law of cosines, but you're willing to believe this, then this is the proof of the law of cosines. OK, so the law of cosines are this interpretation, are equivalent to each other.  any questions? Yes? Why is there a cosine a there?  So, yeah, if you want the next step to recall the law of cosine, it would be to plug in this formula for a.b. And then you would have a cosine. OK, let's keep going. OK, so let's  what is this good for? Now, that we have a definition, we should figure out what we can do with it. So, what are the applications of that product? Well, we'll discover new applications of that product throughout the entire semester. But let me tell you at least about those that are readily visible. So, one is to compute lengths and angles, especially angles.  So let's do an example. Let's say that, for example, I have in space, I have a point p, which is at 1, 0, 0. I have a point Q, which is at 0, 1, 0.  at 0, 0, 2, so it's at height 2. And let's say that I'm curious and I'm wondering what is the angle. So here I have a triangle in space connecting p, q and R. And I'm wondering what is this angle here. OK, so, of course, one solution is to build a model and then go and measure the angle.  how would we do that? Well, so if we look at this formula, we see, so let's say, that we want to find the angle here, well, let's look at the formula for pq.pr, where we say it should be length pq times length pr times the cosine of the angle.  And what do we not know? Well, certainly at this point we don't know the cosine of the angle. That's what we would like to find. But the lengths, certainly we can compute. We know how to find these lengths. And this dot product we know how to compute because we have an easy formula here. OK, so we can compute everything else and then find theta. So actually, what we will do is we will find theta in this way.  We'll take the dot product of pQ with PR, and then we'll divide by the lengths.  OK, so let's see. So we say cosine ?f eta is PQ, that P R, of L,  length PR. So let's try to figure out what is vector PQ. Well, to go from P to Q, I should go minus 1 unit along the x direction, plus 1 unit along the y direction, and I'm not moving in the z direction. So, to go from P to Q, I have to move by minus 1, 1, 0. To go from P to R, I go minus 1 along the x axis and plus 2 along the z axis.  So PR, I claim, is this. Then the length of these vectors, well, we take minus 1 squared plus 1 squared plus 0 squared, square root, and then same thing with the other one. So if a denominator will become, well, there's a square root of 2, and there's a square root of 5.  what about the numerator? Well, so remember to do the dot product, we multiply this by this and that by that, that by that, and we add. Minus 1 times minus 1 makes 1 plus 1 times 0, that's 0. 0 times 2 is 0 again. So we will get one of our square root of 10. OK? That's the cosine of the angle. And, of course, if we want the angle,  actual angle, well, we have to take a  that's really neat about the answer. See, I mean, we got this number. We don't really know what it means exactly, because it makes this together of the lengths and the angle. But one thing's interesting here is the sign of the answer, the fact that we got a positive number. So if you think about it, the lengths are always positive. So the sign of the dot product is the same as the sign of cosine theta. So in fact,  x is less than 90 degrees. So that means, geometricly, my two vectors are going more or less in the same direction. They make an acute angle.  OK, because that's when the cosine will be 0. And it will be negative if the angle is more than 90 degrees. So that means they go however in opposite directions. OK, so that's basically one way to think about what dot product measures. It measures how much the two vectors are going along each other. OK, and that actually leads us to the next application.  So let's see, did I have a number one there? Yes, so if I had a number one, I must have a number two. The second application is to detect our formality. It's to figure out when two things are perpendicular. So our form great to say things are perpendicular. So let's just take an example.  let's say I give you the equation x plus 2y plus 3z equals 0. So that defines a certain set of points in space, and what do you think the set of solutions looks like if I give you this equation? So far I see one, two, three answers.  So I see various competing answers, but yeah, I see a lot of people voting for answer number 4. I see also some, I don't know and some other things, but the majority vote seems to be a claim, and indeed that's the correct answer. So how do we see that it's a claim?  So I should say this is the equation of a claim. So there's many ways to see that. And I'm not going to give you all of them.  let's think, geometrically, about how to express this condition in terms of vectors. So let's say, let's take the origin, O, by convention, is the point 0, 0, 0. And let's take a point P that will satisfy this equation or not. So it coordinates x, y, z. So what does this condition here mean? Well, it means the following thing.  So, vector Op, of course, has components x, y, z. Now, we can think of this as actually a dot product between Op and a mysterious vector, that my family mysterious for very long, namely the vector 1, 2, 3. So, this condition is the same as Op dot a equals 0.  If I take the dot product, op.a, I get x times 1 plus y times 2 plus c times 3. But now, what does it mean that the dot product between op and a is 0? Well, it means that op and a are perpendicular. OK, so I have this vector a. I'm not going to bother to draw it really strictly.  then a point to p, solve this equation, exactly when the vector from O to P is perpendicular to A. And I claim that defines a plane. For example, if it helps you to see it, take a vertical vector, what does it mean to be perpendicular to the vertical vector? It means you're horizontal. It's the horizontal plane. Here, it's a plane that passes through the origin and is perpendicular to this vector A.  OK, so what we get is a plane for the origin, by a particular, to this guy.  is that two vectors have a dot product equal to 0, if and only if, that's equivalent to cosine of the angle between them is 0, that means the angle is 90 degrees, that means a and b are perpendicular. So we have a very fast way of checking whether two vectors are perpendicular.  one additional application, I think we'll see that actually tomorrow, is to find the components of a vector along a certain direction. So I claim we can use this intuition I gave about that product telling us how much two vectors go in the same direction to actually give a precise meaning to the notion of component for a vector, not just along the x, y or the x's, but along any direction in space.  I should probably stop here. But I will see you tomorrow at 2 here. And we'll learn more about that and about cross product.