 The following content is provided under a Creative Commons license. Your support will help MIT OpenCourseWare continue to offer high-quality educational resources for free. To make a donation or to view additional materials from hundreds of MIT courses, visit MIT OpenCourseWare at ocw.mit.edu.  And how it relates, how they relate to linear systems and made faces, as we have seen during Tuesday's lecture. So let's start again with equations of planes. So, remember, we've seen,  And the claim is of the form ax plus by plus cz equals d, where a, b, c and d are just numbers. And so this expresses the condition for a point that coordinates x, y, c to be in the plane. And so, an equation of this form  So, let's see how that works again. So, let's start with an example. Let's say that we want to find an equation for the plane for the origin,  n equals, let's say, the normal vector 1, 5, 10. OK, so how do we find an equation of this plane? Well, remember that we can get that equation by thinking geometrically. So what's our thinking going to be?  x is, and we have this vector n, 1, 5, 10, and it's supposed to be perpendicular to our plane, and our plane passes for the origin here. So we want to think of a plane that's perpendicular to this vector.  well, when is a point in that plane? Let's say we have a point P, xyz, where the condition for P to be in the plane should be that we have a right angle here. So P is in the plane whenever Op dot n,  xy is 0. And if we write that explicitly, well, vector op has components xyz and has components 1, 5, 10, so that will give us x plus 5y plus 10z equals 0. OK, that's the equation of our claim.  a slightly different problem. So let's do another problem. Let's try to find the equation of a plane for a point p0, which coordinates, say, 2, 1 minus 1, and with normal vector, again, the same guy, 1 5 10.  well, we are going to use the same method. In fact, let's think first for a second. So, I said we have our normal vector n. And it's going to be perpendicular to both planes at the same time. So, in fact, our two planes will be parallel to each other.  for a partial n-curato and on passing for the origin. And now we have a new plane that's going to pass, well, not for the origin, but for maybe this point p0, and I don't play nowhere at this, but let's say, for example, that p0 is here. Then I will just have to shift my plane so that, instead of passing for the origin, it passes for this new point.  So how are we going to do that? Well, now for a point P to be in our new plane, we need for vector no longer O P, but P0 P to be perpendicular to n. OK? So P is in this new plane if the vector P0 P is perpendicular to n.  for a second, what's vector P0 or P? Well, we take the coordinates of P, and we subtract those of P0. So that should be x minus 2, y minus 1, and z plus 1, dot product with 1 5 10 equals 0.  x times y minus 1 plus 10 times z plus 1 equals 0, or let's put the constants on the other side. We get x plus 5y plus 10z equals, well, here we have minus 2 becomes 2, minus 5 becomes 5, 10 becomes minus 10, I think we end up with negative 3.  So, see, the only thing that changes between these two equations is the constant term on the right-hand side, the thing that I call d. And the other common feature is that the coefficients of x, y, and z, 1, 5, and 10, correspond exactly to the normal vector. So, that's something you should remember about planes. These coefficients here correspond exactly to a normal vector. And, well, this constant term here, roughly,  far, when you move from, so if you have a plane through the origin, the right-hand side will be 0, and if you move to a parallel plane, then this number will become something else. So how actually could we have found that minus 3 more quickly? Well, we know that the first part of the equation is like this. And we know something else. We know that the point p0 is in the plane. So if we plug the coordinates of p0 in the right-hand side,  And into this, well, x is 2 plus 5 times 1, plus 10 times minus 1, we get minus 3. So in fact, the number we should have here should be minus 3 so that p 0 is a solution. OK, so let me point out. So maybe I'll go to 1 here again. So these three numbers, 1 5 10, are exactly the normal vector.  And one way that we can get this number here is by computing the value of the left-hand side at the point p0. We plug in the point p0 into the left-hand side. OK? Any questions about that?  OK, by the way, I mean, of course, a plane doesn't have just one equation. It has infinitely many equations, because if I take, instead, say, if I multiply everything by 2, 2x plus 10y plus 20z equals minus 6 is also an equation for this plane. OK, that's because, of course, we have normal vectors of all sizes. We can choose how big we make it.  So, again, just to repeat, the single most important thing here in the equation ax plus by plus c is equals d, the coefficients a, b, c give us actually a normal vector to the plane.  So, that's why, in fact, what matters to us, mostly, is finding the normal vector. And in particular, if you remember last time, I explained something about how we can find normal vector to the plane if we know points in the plane. Namely, we can take the cross product of two vectors contained in the plane.  OK, so let's just do an example to see if we completely understand what's going on.  with components 1, 2, negative 1, and I give you the plane x plus y plus 3c equals 5. So do you think that this vector is parallel to the plane? They are particular to it, neither. OK, I'm starting to see a few votes.  OK, so I see that most of you are answering number two. This vector is perpendicular to the plane. There are some other answers to. Well, let's try to figure it out. OK, so I have a question.  let's do the example, say, V is 1, 2, negative 1, and the plane is x plus y, plus Fez equals 5.  take the coefficients of x, y and z. So that's 1, 1, 3. So 1, 1, 3 is perpendicular to the plane. How do we get all the other vectors that are perpendicular to the plane, that are perpendicular to the plane? Well, all the perpendicular vectors are parallel to each other. So that means that they are just obtained by maybe multiplying this guy by some number, 2, 2, 6, for example, would still be perpendicular to the plane.  have, one-half free-haves is also bappaniculat over plane. But now, see, these guys are not proportional to each other. So, V is not bappaniculat over  being perpendicular to the plane is the same as being parallel to its normal vector. Now, what about testing if V is instead parallel to the plane? Well, it's parallel to the plane if it's perpendicular to n. Well, let's check that. So, let's try to see if it's perpendicular.  to n. Well, let's do V.n. That's 1, 2, negative 1.1, 1, 1, 3. If you get 1 plus 2 minus 3, that's 0. So, yes. So if it's perpendicular to n,  maybe it's somewhere like that. It's actually going to be parallel to the plane.  x sub x is a vector into the claim equation. You get 0. What is that? What's the significance?  So there's two different things here. One is the point we've coordinates 1, 2 minus 1 is not in the plane. So what that tells us is that if I put my vector, V, at the origin, then the point here is not going to be in the plane.  On the other hand, you're right, the left-hand side evaluates to 0. What that means is if, instead, they had taken the plane x plus y plus 3c equals 0, then it would be inside. And the plane x plus y, so this one is x plus y plus 3c equals 5. x plus y plus 3c equals 0 would be a plane parallel to it, but for the origin.  is parallel to the plane, if we move the plane to a parallel plane for the origin, then the end point of the vector is in the plane. OK, that's another way to convince yourselves. Any other questions? OK, so let's move on.  So, last time we saw about matrices and linear systems. So, let's try to think now about linear systems in terms of equations of planes and intersections of planes. I mean, remember, a linear system, it's a bunch of equations. Let's say a three-by-three linear system, it's three different equations. Each of the equation is the equation of a plane. So, in fact, if we try to solve a system of equations, that means actually we're trying to find a point.  point, that is on several planes at the same time. So, one more board here. So let's say that we have a free-by-fry linear  give you, but let's say I give you x plus z equals 1, x plus y equals 2, x plus 2y plus xz equals 3. What does this mean? What does it mean to solve this? It means we want to find x, yz, which satisfy all of these conditions.  first equation first. Well, the first equation says our point should be on the plane which has this equation. Then the second equation says, oh, our point should also be on this plane. OK? So in fact, if you just look at the first two equations, that means you have two planes. And the solutions,  So, these two equations determine for you two planes and two planes intersect in a line. OK? Now, well, what happens with a third equation?  So if we want to solve the first two equations, we have to be on this line. And if we want to solve the third one, we also need to be on another plane. And in general, three planes intersect in a point, because this line of intersection,  OK, so three planes intersect in a point, and one way to think about it is that the line where the first two planes intersect meets the third plane in a point. And that point is the solution to the linear system. OK, so the line, let's say, formed by the, so this is mathematical notation for the intersection between the first two planes.  intersects the third plane in a point, which is going to be the solution. So the solution, actually, how do we find it?  the solution is given, sorry, so let me use matrix notation. Remember, we saw on Tuesday that the solution to ax equals b is given by x equals a inverse b. And we get from here to here by multiplying on the left by a inverse.  inverse B. And, once again, it's A in B and not B. A inverse, if you try to set up the multiplication, B. A inverse doesn't work. The sizes are not compatible. You can't multiply the other way around. OK, so that's pretty good, unless it doesn't work that way.  OK, and what could go wrong? Well, let's say that our first two planes do intersect nicely in the line, but let's think about the third plane. Maybe the third plane does not intersect that line nicely in a point. Maybe it's actually parallel to that line. OK, so let's try to think about this question for a second. Oh, sorry, this is 2 out of the left.  So let's say that the set of solutions to a free-by-frel in your system is not just one point. So we don't have a unique solution that we can get this way. What could happen? What do you think would happen? OK, I see answers number 3 and 5 seem to be done in 18.  also a bit of answer number 1. And in fact, these are pretty good answers. I see even some of you figured out that you can answer one and three at the same time, or three and five at the same time. I yet have to see somebody with free hands answer all three numbers at the same time. OK, so, indeed, we'll see very soon that we could have either no solution or line or a plane.  well, two points, two solutions, we will see is not actually a possibility, because if you have two different solutions, then the entire line for these two points is also going to be made of solutions. A tetrahedron is just there to, you know, amuse you. It's not actually a good answer to that question. It's not very likely that you will get a tetrahedron out of intersecting planes. A plane is in it possible, and I don't know it's still OK for a few more minutes.  but we're going to get to the bottom of this, and then we will know. OK, so let's try to figure out what can happen. So let me go back to my picture. And so I had my first two planes, if I determine a line, and now I have my third plane. And maybe my third plane is actually parallel to the line, but doesn't pass for it.  then I'm afraid that there's no solutions, OK? Because to solve the system of equations, I need to be in the first two planes. So that means I need to be in that vertical line, well, that line was supposed to be right, but I guess it doesn't really show up as right. And it also needs to be in the third plane, but the line and the plane are parallel to each other. There's just no place where they intersect. OK, so there's no way to solve all the equations.  And, on the other hand, the other thing that could happen is that actually the line is contained in the plane. And then, well, it means any point on that line will actually solve, automatically, the third equation. OK, so if you try solving a system that looks like this, by hand, what you will notice, if you do substitutions, eliminations, and so on, what you will notice is that, after you've dealt with two of the equations,  here, would actually turn out to be the same as what you got out of the first two. It doesn't give you any additional information. It's as if you had only two equations. The previous case would be when actually the third equation contradicts something that you can get out of the first two. For example, maybe out of the first two, you got x plus z equals 1, and the third equation is x plus z equals 2. Well, it can't be 1 and 2 at the same time. Maybe another way to say it.  is that this picture is one where you can get, you know, out of the equations. You get a number equals a different number. That's impossible. And that picture is one where out of the equations you get 0 equals 0, which is certainly true, but it's not a very useful equation. So you can actually finish solving. OK, so let me write that down. So, unless the third plane,  say it is parallel to the line where p1 and p2 intersect.  of intersections of p1 and p2 is actually contained in the third plane, then we have infinitely many solutions. Namely, any point on the line will automatically solve the third equation.  Now, the other possibility, the other subcase is if the line of intersection of p1 and p2,  is parallel to p-free and not contained in it.  So again, just to show you a bit just once again, when we have the first two planes, they give us a line. And now, depending on what happens to that line in relation to the third plane, various situations can happen. So if the third line just hits, sorry, if a line hits the third plane in a point, then that's going to be our solution. And if that line instead is parallel to the third plane,  well, if it's parallel and outside of it, then we have no solution. If it's parallel and contains in it, actually, then we have infinitely many solutions. OK, so going back to our list of possibilities, that means, well, let's see what can happen.  well, we've seen that happens when the line where the first two-plane intersect is parallel to the third one, that exists. Two points, well, that didn't come up. OK, and as I said, the problem is if the line of intersection of the first two planes actually has two points that are in the third plane, well, then that means actually the entire line must also be in the third plane. So if you have two solutions, then you have more than two, actually.  In fact, you have infinitely many, and we've seen that can happen. OK, Tetranhedron still doesn't look very promising. What about a plane? Well, that's a case that I didn't explain, because I've been assuming that p1 and p2 are different planes, and they intersect in a line. But in fact, well, they could be parallel, in which case we already have no solution to the first two equations.  And now, if a third plane is also the same plane, you know, if all three planes are the same plane, well, then you have a plane of solutens. If I give you three times the same equation that is a linear system. It's not a very interesting one, but it is a linear system. OK, and I don't know is no longer on the solution either. OK, any questions?  if you claim x plus y plus b is equal to 1, as opposed to 2, is 3. OK, so that's a very good question. The question is, what is the geometric significance of an equation like x plus y plus 0? Say, this one equals 2, 1, 2, 3, or something else. Well, if the equation is x plus y plus b equals 0, it means that our plane is passing for the origin. And then if we change the constant, it means we move to a parallel plane. So the first guess that you  have is that this number on the right-hand side is the distance between the origin and the plane. It tells us how far from the origin we are. That is not quite true. In fact, that would be true if the coefficients here from the unit vector, then this guy would just be the distance to the origin. Otherwise, you have to actually scale by the length of this normal vector. And I think there's a problem in the notes that will,  So, you exactly how this works. OK, but you should think of it, roughly, as how much have we moved the plane away from the original?  let's try to think about what exactly this case, how do we detect now, in which situation we are? Because that's all very nice in the picture. But it's difficult to draw a plane. In fact, when I draw these pictures, I'm always very careful not to actually try to pretend to draw an actual plane given by an equation, or when I do, then it's blatantly false.  of matrices, in particular, what's wrong with this? Why can't we always say the solution is x equals A in verse B? The point is, actually, you cannot always invert a matrix. So, Ricot, we've seen this formula that A in verse is one of our determinant of A, which is, in fact,  times the adjoint matrix. And, well, we've learned how to compute this thing. Remember we had to take minus, then flip some signs and then transpose. Well, that's the step we can always do. We can always do these calculations. But then at the end, we have to divide by the determinant. Well, that's fine if the determinant is not 0.  in fact, what I didn't mention last time is that the matrix is invertible, that means it has an inverse. Exactly when it's determinant is not 0. So that's something we should remember. So if a determinant is not 0, then we can use our method to find the inverse, and then we can solve using this method.  not then not. Yes? So I have to be near x, my natural point, invert A, which is a term that A is at R. That's right. So what I'm saying is we can invert the matrix A if the determinant is not 0. And if you look again at the method that we saw last time, so first we had to compute this adjoint matrix. And these operations we can always do. If we are given a 3 by 3 matrix, we can always compute the adjoint. And then the last step to find the inverse was to divide by the determinant.  And that we can only do if the determinant is not 0. So if we have a matrix, which is not 0, then we know how to find the inverse. If the determinant is 0, then of course this method does not work. But I'm saying, actually, even more, there is not an inverse at all. It's not just that our method fails. I cannot take the inverse of the matrix with determinant 0.  the situation where the determinant is not 0, is exactly this nice, usual situation, where the three planes intersect in a point. While the situation where the determinant is 0, is this situation here, where the line determined by the first two planes, is parallel to the third plane. OK, so let me emphasize this again.  And let's see again what happens. OK, so let's start with an easier case. So it's called the case of a homogeneous system.  are very reliant on the scaling. So, the homogeneous system is one where the right-hand side is 0. There's no b. If you want the constant terms here are all 0, 0, 0, 0. So, this one is not homogeneous. So, let's see what happens there.  x plus z equals 0, x plus y equals 0, and x plus 2y, plus f is also equal to 0. Well, can we solve these equations? Yeah, I think actually you already know a very simple solution to these equations. Yeah, you can just take x, y, and z, all to be 0. So there's always,  And, obvious, solution, namely 0, 0, and in mathematical jargon, this is called the trivial solution. OK? So there's always this trivial solution. And what's the geometric interpretation?  well, having zeros here means that all three planes pass for the origin.  x plus whole of the origin. So now there's two subcases. OK? One case is if the determinant of the matrix A is nonzero, well, that means that we can invert A.  then that means we can solve the system by multiplying by A-inverse. If we multiply by A-inverse, well, we'll get x equals A-inverse times 0, which is 0. And that's the only solution. Because, well, if A x is 0, then let's multiply by A-inverse.  x equals 0, we've solved it. OK, no other solution. So, to go back to this picture, Swet, we will enjoy its viscos.  other case, if a determinant of A equals 0, then it means that actually this doesn't quite work. So let's see. What does it mean that the determinant of A is 0?  So, that's the same thing as saying that the determinant of the three normal vectors to our three planes is 0. So, that means that n1, n2, and n3 are actually in the same plane.  it's called coplanar. These three vectors are coplanar. So let's see what happens. So I claim it will correspond to this situation here. Let's draw the normal vectors to these three planes. OK, well, it's not very easy to see.  the normal vectors to my planes, well, they're all in the direction that's perpendicular to the line of intersection. They're all in the same plane. So, if I try to form a box in aau-parly-le-pepid with these three normal vectors, well, I will get something that's completely flat and has no volume. Has volume 0.  x has volume 0. And the fact that the normal vectors are coplanar tells us that, in fact, let me start a new blackboard. OK, so now let's say that our normal vectors n1 and 2n3 are all in the same plane. And let's think about the direction that's bigger than  So they are particular to n1, n2, and n3 at the same time.  So let me try to draw that picture again. So we have three planes.  I drew it before hand, and I said the normal vectors are all in the same plane. So, what else do I know? I know that all these planes pass through the origin. So, the origin is, in the intersection of the three planes. Now, I say, actually, the  to my three planes, well, that's kind of hard to do over a little bit.  here, that's a terrible picture. It's supposed to be in all the planes. OK, you can see that there are, on the side, screens. OK, and why is that? Well, that's because, my line, it's perpendicular to the normal vectors. So it's parallel to the planes. It's parallel to all the planes. Now, why is it in the planes instead of parallel to them?  well, that's because my line goes for the origin, and the origin is on the plane. So, certainly, my line has to be contained in the planes, not parallel to them. OK, so the line for the origin and perpendicular to the plane of n1, n2, and 3,  is parallel to all three planes, and because the planes go through the origin, it's contained in them. OK, so what happens here is I have, in fact, infinitely many solutions.  And how do I find these solutions? Well, if I want to find something that's perpendicular to n1, n2, and n3, well, if I just want to be perpendicular to n1 and n2, I can take their cross product, exactly.  xn2 is perpendicular to n1 and to n2, and also to n3, because n3 is in the same claim as n1 and n2. So if you're perpendicular to n1 and n2, you're also perpendicular to n3.  this vector goes along the line of intersections. OK? So that's the case of homogeneous systems. And then let's finish with the other case. So the general case. So that means if we look at a system A x equals B,  well, with B now anything, there's two cases. If the determinant of A is not 0, then there's a unique solution, namely x equals A inverse B.  then it means, actually, we have this situation with planes that are all parallel to the same line. And then we have, either no solution or infinitely many solutions. It cannot be a single solution. Now, whether you have no solutions or infinitely many solutions, well, we haven't actually developed the tools to answer that.  but if you try solving the system by hand by elimination, you will see that you end up, maybe with something that says 0 equals 0 and you have infinitely many solutions. Actually, if you can find one solution, then you know that there's infinitely many. On the other hand, if you end up with something that's a contradiction, like 1 equals 2, then you know there's no solutions. OK, so that's the end for today. Tomorrow, we will learn about parametric equations for lines and problems.  helps.