 The following content is provided under a Creative Commons license. Your support will help MIT OpenCourseWare continue to offer high-quality educational resources for free. To make a donation or to view additional materials from hundreds of MIT courses, visit MIT OpenCourseWare at ocw.mit.edu. So if you remember last time we looked at geometric equations,  as a way of describing the motion of a point that moves in the plane or in space as a function of time or your favorite parameter that will tell you how far the motion has progressed. And I think we did in detail the example of the cycloid, which is the curve traced by a point,  on a wheel that's rolling on a flat surface. We had this example where we have this wheel that's rolling on the x-axis, and we have this point on the wheel. And as it moves around, it traces a trajectory that looked at the x-axis.  M are all less, like this. So, I'm trying the new color. Is this visible from the back? So, no more blue. So, remember, in general, we are trying to find the position, x of t, y of t, maybe z of t, for n  of a moving point along a trajectory. And one way to think about this is in terms of the position vector. So the position vector is just the vector  whose components are the coordinates of the point.  is the vector Op, and that's also the position vector of t. So, just to give you, again, that example, if I take the cycloid for a little bit,  will of radius 1. And let's say that we are going at unit speed so that the angle that we used as a parameter less time is the same thing as time. Then the position vector, in this case, we found to be, just to make sure that they have it right, t minus sine t.  cosine t, no, 1 minus cosine t. OK, same, that's a formula that you should have in your notes from last time, except we had theta instead of t, because we were using the angle, but now I'm saying we're moving at unit speed, so time and angle are the same thing. OK, so now what's interesting about this is we can analyze the motion in more than  detail. So now that we know the position of a point as a function of time, we can try to study how it varies and in particular things like the speed and the acceleration. So let's start with speed. So in fact, we can do better than speed. Let's not start with speed. So speed is a number. It tells you how fast you're going along your trajectory. If you're driving in a car, then it tells you how fast you're  are going, but unless you have one of these fancy cars with the GPS, it doesn't tell you in which direction you're going. And that's useful information, too, if you're trying to figure out what your trajectory is. So in fact, there's two aspects to it. One is how fast you're going, and they're rising in what direction you're going. That means, actually, we should use a vector, maybe, to think about this. And so that's called the velocity  And the way we can get it, so it's called usually V. So V here stands for velocity, more than for vector. And you just get it by taking the derivative of the position vector with respect to time. OK, now it's our first time writing this kind of thing with a vector. So the basic role is you can take the derivative of a vector quantity just by taking the derivatives of each component.  x dt, d y dt, and if you have the component, dz dt. So let me. OK.  OK, so let's see what it is for the cycloid. So in the example of a cycloid, well, so what do we get when we take the derivative of this formula over there?  minus cosine t, the derivative of 1 is 0.  we are going in in what direction. So, for example, observe, remember, last time, at the end of class, we were trying to figure out what exactly happens near the bottom point. When we have this motion that seems to stop and go backwards. And we answered that one way, but let's try to understand it in terms of velocity. Where if I plug t equals 0 in here, then 1 minus cosine t is 0, sine t is 0, the velocity,  is 0, so at that time, at that particular time, our point is actually not moving. Of course, it's been moving just before and it starts moving just afterwards. It's just, you know, the instant, at that particular instant, the speed is 0. So that's, as likely, maybe counterintuitive thing that something is moving, and at that time, it's actually stopped.  Now, let's see. So that's a vector, and it's useful, but if you want just the usual speed as a number, then what will you do? Well, you will just take exactly the magnitude of this vector. So, speed, which is the scalar quantity, is going to be just the magnitude of a vector of e.  So in this case, well, it would be the square root of 1 minus cosine t squared plus sine square t. And if you expand that, well, so you will get, let me take a bit more space, that's going to be square root of 1 minus 2 cosine t.  plus cosine square t, plus sine square t, it seems to simplify a little bit, because we have cosine square plus sine square, that's 1. So it's going to be square root of 2 minus 2 cosine t. So at this point, if I was going to ask you, when is the smallest of the largest, you could answer based on that.  turns out to be 0, the point is not moving. At t equals pi, that ends up being square root of 2 plus 2, which is 4. So that's 2, and that's when you actually add the top of the arch, and that's when the point is moving the fastest. In fact, there is moving twice as fast as the wheel, because the wheel is moving to the right at unit speed, and the point is also rotating, so it's moving to the right at unit speed relative to the center, so that the two effects add up and give you a speed of 2.  So, anyway, that's a formula we can get. OK? Now, what about acceleration? So here, I should warn you that there's a series discrepancy between the usual,  when you drive a car, and the one that will be using. So you might think acceleration is just the derivative of speed. If my car goes 55 miles an hour on the highway, then it's going at constant speed. It's not accelerating. But let's say that I'm taking a really tight turn. Then I'm going to feel something. There's some force being exerted. And in fact, there is a sideways acceleration at that point, even though the speed is not changing.  And the acceleration vector is just the derivative of a velocity vector. So, even if a speed is constant, that means, even if the length of the velocity vector stays the same, the velocity vector can still rotate.  that produces acceleration. OK, and so this is the notion of acceleration. That's relevant in physics. For example, when you write f equals ma, that's really what a, you know, that's the a that you have in mind here. It's a vector. Of course, if you're moving in a straight line, then the two notions are the same. Acceleration is also going to be along the line and it's going to have to do with the derivative of speed. But in general, that's not quite the same.  So for example, let's look at the cyclorid. If we take the example of the cyclorid, well, what's the derivative of 1 minus cosine t? It's sine t. And what's the derivative of sine t? Cosine t.  So in particular, let's look at what happens at time t equals 0, when the point is not moving. Well, the acceleration vector there will be 0, 1. So what that means is that if I look at my trajectory,  at this point, well, then the acceleration vector is pointing in that direction. It's the unit vector in the vertical direction. So my point is not moving at that particular time, but it's accelerating up. So that means, actually, that as it comes down, first, it's slowing down when it stops here and then it reverses going back up. So that's another way to understand what we were saying.  last time that the trajectory at that point has a vertical tendency, because that's the direction in which the motion is going to occur just before and just after time 0. OK, any questions about that?  So I should insist, maybe, on one thing, which is that so we can differentiate vectors, just component by component. OK, and we can differentiate vector expressions, according to certain rules, that we'll see in a moment.  the length of the R dt, which is the speed, is equal to the length R dt. OK, this is completely false, and they're really not the same. OK, so if you have to differentiate the length of a vector, then basically you're in trouble. If you really really want to do it, well, the length of a vector is the square root of the sums of the squares of the  and from that you can use formula for the derivative of the square root, and the chain role and various other things, and you can get there. But it will not be a very nice expression. There's no simple formula for this kind of thing. Fortunately, we almost never have to compute this kind of thing, because, after all, it's not very relevant quantity, what's more relevant, might be this one. This is actually the speed. This one, I don't know what it means, in general.  So, let's continue our exploration. So, the next concept that I want to define is that of arc length. So, arc length is just the distance that you have traveled along the curve. So, if you're in a car, it has this mileage counter that tells you how far  are you've gone, how much fuel you've used, if it's a fancy car. And what it does is it actually, it integrates the speed of our time to give you the arc length along with trajectory of the car. So the usual notation that we'll have is S for arc length. I am not quite sure how you get an S out of this, but it's the usual notation. OK, so S is the distance  are also traveled along with trajectory. And for that to make sense, of course, we need to fix a reference point. Maybe on the cycloid, we'd say it's the distance starting from the origin. In general, maybe you'll say you start at time equals 0, but it's a convention.  New in advance, you could have actually your car's mileage counter to count backwards from the point where the car will die and stop working. I mean, that would be slightly freaky, but you know, you could have certainly a negative arc length that gets closer and closer to 0 and gets to 0 at the end of it, trajectory, or anything you want. I mean, arc length would be positive or negative. Typically, it's negative on your befer, the reference point, and positive afterwards.  to the things we've seen there, well, so in particular, you know, how do you relate arc length and time? Well, so there's a simple relation, which is that the rate of change of arc length, there's this time, well, that's going to be the speed at which you're moving.  because the speed as a scalar quantity tells you how much distance you're covering per unit time. And in fact, to be completely honest, I should put an absolute value here, because there's examples of curves, maybe where your motion is going back and forth along the same curve, and then you don't want to keep counting R-clinth.  all the time, actually, maybe you want to say that the arc length increases when it decreases along the cube. I mean, you get to choose how you count it. But in this case, if you are moving back and forth, it would make more sense to have the arc length first increase, when the crazy increase again, and so on.  So if you want to know really what the arc length is, then basically, the only way to do it is to integrate speed versus time. So if you wanted to know how long an arc of cycler it is, you have this nice-looking curve, how long is it? Well, you'd have to basically integrate this quantity from t equals 0 to 2 pi.  And to say that Rauf, I don't really know how to integrate that.  We don't actually have a formula for the length at this point. However, we'll see one later using a cool trick and multivariable calculus. So for now, we'll just leave the formula like that, and we don't know how long it is. Well, you can put that into your calculator and get a numerical value.  Now, another useful notion is the unit tangent vector. To the trajectory, so the usual notation is t hat.  how do we get this unit tangent vector? So maybe I should have pointed out before that, you know, if you're moving along some trajectory, say you're going in that direction, then when you're at this point, the velocity vector is going to be tangent to the trajectory. It tells you the direction of motion, in particular. So if you want a unit vector that goes in the same direction, all you have to do is just  so that its length becomes 1. So it's V divided by magnitude of V.  Now, it seems like now we have a lot of different things that should be related in some way. So, let's see what we can say. Well, we can say that dR by dt, so that's the velocity vector, that's the same thing as if I use the chain rule, dR ds times ds dt.  So let's think about these things. So this guy here, we've just seen that's the same as the speed. So this one here should be V divided by its length.  So let me rewrite that. It's d s dt. So maybe if I actually stated directly that way, see, I'm just saying the velocity vector has a length and a direction. The length is the speed. The direction is tangent to the trajectory.  So the speed is ds dt, and the tangent vector is t hat. And that's how we get this.  So let's try just to see why DRDS should be T. Well, let's think of DRDS. DRDS means, you know, position vector R means you have the origin, which is somewhere out there, and the vector R is here. So DRDS means we move by a small amount, delta S, along with trajectory, by a certain distance, delta S. And we look at how the position vector changes.  L will have a small change. Let me call that the vector delta R corresponding to the size corresponding to the length delta R. L should be essentially roughly equal to, well, its direction will be tangent to the trajectory.  travel, then the motion will be almost tangent to the trajectory, times the length of it will be delta S, the distance that I have troubled. Maybe I should, sorry, maybe I should re-explan that on a separate board. OK, so let's say that we have an amount of time delta t. So let's zoom into that curve.  So we have R at time t. We have R at time t plus delta t. This vector here I will call delta R. The length of this vector is delta S. And the direction is essentially that of a tangent vector.  So delta S over delta T, that's the distance to have old, divided by the time, that's going to be close to the speed. And delta R is, approximately, T times delta S. So now if I divide both sides by delta T,  at t, I get rest. And if I take the limit as delta t tends to 0, then I get the same formula with derivatives and with an equality, instead of an approximation. The approximation becomes better and better if I go to smaller intervals.  OK, are there any questions about this?  be more careful, actually. So you're asking about whether a delta R is actually strictly  this arc inside the curve, while the tension vector, will be going in this direction. So they're not strictly parallel to each other. And that's why it's only approximately equal. Similarly, this distance, the length of delta R is not exactly the length along the curve. It's actually a bit shorter. But if you imagine a smaller and smaller portion of the curve, then this effect of the curve being a curve and not a straight line  are negligible, if you zoom into the care of sufficiently, then it looks more and more like a straight line, and then what I say becomes true in the limit. Any other questions?  OK, so let me show you a nice example of why we might want to use vectors to study parametric curves. Because, after all, a lot of what's here, you can just do in coordinates. And we don't really need vectors. Well, actually, vectors being a language, you never strictly need it, but it's useful to have an notion of vectors. So I want to tell you a bit,  about k-plus second-low of series-term mechanics.  So what happens, what happens back then, is Kepler was trying to observe the motion of planets in the sky, and trying to come up with general explanations of how they move. Before him, people were saying, well, they kind of move in a circle, but maybe it's more complicated than that. We need to add smaller circular motions on top of each other, and so on. They had more and more complicated theories. And then Kepler came with these laws that say, basically, that planets move in an ellipse,  around the sun, and that they move in a very specific way along that ellipse. So there's actually three laws, but let me just tell you about the second one that has a very nice vector interpretation. So what Kepler's second law says is that the motion of planets is, first of all, they move in a plane,  And the aier, swept out by the line from the sun to the planet, is swept at constant time. Sorry, it's swept at constant right.  x is swept out by the line at a constant right. So that's an interesting law,  of it.  OK, so let me explain again. So this law says, maybe the sun, let's put the sun here at the origin. And let's have a planet.  So around the sun, in some trajectory, so this is supposed to be light blue. Can you see it as different from white? No, OK, meaning well. OK, it doesn't really matter. So the planet moves on its orbit, and if you wait for a certain time,  then a little bit later it will be here, then here, and so on, then you can look at the amount of area inside this triangular wedge. And the claim is that the amount of area in here is proportional to the time elapsed. So in particular, if the planet is closer to the sun, then it has to go faster. And if it's far away from the sun, then it has to go slower so that the area remains proportional to time.  And I think the way he came to it was really just by using a lot of observations and trying to measure what things were, you know, what was true, it wasn't true. But let's try to see how we can understand that in terms of what we know today about mechanics. So in fact, what happens is that Newton, so Newton was quite a bit later.  in the 17th century, instead of beginning of a 17th century. So, he was able to explain this, using his laws for gravitational attraction.  And you'll see that if we reformulate capital Lau in terms of vectors, then, and if we work a bit with these vectors, we're going to end up with something that's actually, and completely obvious to us now, at the time it was very far from obvious, but to us now it's completely obvious. So let's try to see what does capital Lau say in terms of vectors.  OK, so let's think of what kinds of vectors we might want to have in here.  I think of maybe the position vector. And maybe it's variation. So if we wait as time out of time, we'll have a vector delta R, which is the change in position vector, otherwise,  what's the most complicated thing in here? It's this RIA swept out by the line. How do we express that RIA in terms of vectors? Well, I've almost given the answer by drawing this picture. If I take a sufficiently small amount of time, this red region looks like a triangle. So we have to find the RIA of a triangle.  is approximately equal to one-half of the area of a parallel logarithm, that I could form from these vectors. And the area of a parallel logarithm is given by the magnitude of a cross product. So I should say this is the area swept in time delta t. And you should think of delta t as relatively small.  I mean, at the scale of a planet, that might still be, you know, a few days, but small compared to the overall trajectory. So now, let's remember that the amount there which we moved, delta R, is approximately equal to V times delta T. OK? And just using the definition of a velocity vector.  So let's use that. Well, so it's again, approximately equal to R xv, magnitude, times delta t. I can take out the delta t, which is a scalar. So now, what does it mean to say that R is swept at a constant rate?  So that means, so the last says, in fact, that the length of this cross product, R cos v, equals constant. R cos v has constant length. Any questions about that?  No, yes, let me try to explain that again. So what I'm claiming is that the length of the cross product R xv,  of the R l and R l, are planet moves by V delta T. So if it moves by V delta T, it means that this triangle up there has two sides. One is the position vector R, the other one is V delta T. So its R here is given by one-half of the magnitude of the cross product. That's the formula we've seen for the R here of the triangle in space. So the R here is one-half of the cross product R and V delta T.  The magnitude of the cosprolate. So to say that the rate at which aria is swept is constant, means that these two are proportional. Aria divided by delta t is constant over time. And so this is constant. OK. Now, what about the other half of the law? Well, it says that the motion is not plain.  And so we have a plane in which the Mothan takes place, and it contains also the sun, and it contains the trajectory. So let's think about that plane. Well, I claim that the position vector is in the plane.  at another time, or at any time. But in fact, what's also true is that the velocity vector is in the plane. OK, if I'm moving in the plane, then position and velocity are in there. So the plane of motion contains R and V. So what's the direction of the cross product?  are cross-v. Well, it's the direction that's,  x of c has constant length and constant direction. In fact, in general, maybe I should say something about this. So if you just look at the position vector and the velocity vector for any motion at any given time, then, together, they determine some plane. And that's the plane that contains the origin, the point, and the velocity vector. If you want, it's the plane in which the motion seems to be going at the given time.  is not in a plane, then that plane will change. It's somehow the instant, you know, the plane in which the motion is taking place at the given time. And to say that the motion actually stays in that plane forever, it means that this guy will not change direction. OK, so.  So k plus second law is actually equivalent to saying that R x v equals constant.  in terms of derivatives, it means d by dt of R xv is the 0 vector. OK? Now, so there's an interesting thing to know, which is that we can use the usual product hold for derivatives with vector expressions, with those products or cross products.  is that when we differentiate across product, we have to be careful that the guy on the left, the guy on the right, stays on the right. OK, so if you know uv prime equals u prime v plus uv prime, then you're safe. If you know it as u prime v plus v prime u, then you're not safe. OK, so that's the only thing to watch for. So product whole is OK,  for taking the derivative of a dot product, where you don't actually even need to be very careful about all their things, all derivative of a cross product, where you just need to be a little bit more careful. OK, so now that we know that, we can write this as dRdT  xv plus R cos dv dt. OK, well, let's reformulate things, slightly. So dR dt already has a name. In fact, that's V. OK, that's what we call the velocity vector. So this is V cos V plus R cos. What is dv dt? That's the acceleration. A.  equals 0. Now, what's the next step? We know what V cross V is, because remember, a vector of cross-head set is always 0.  0, and that's the same as saying that the cross product of two vectors is 0, exactly when the parely lorem that they form has no area. And the way in which that happens is if they are actually parallel to each other. So that means the acceleration is parely to the position. So in fact, what Kepler's second law says is that the acceleration is parely,  to the position vector. And since we know that acceleration is caused by a force, that's equivalent to the fact that the gravitational force is parallel to the position vector, that means, well, you know, if you have a sun here at the origin. And if you have your planet, well, the gravitational force caused by the sun  along this line. And, in fact, the lot doesn't even say, whether it's going two-way word for the sun, or away from the sun. Well, what we know now is that, of course, the attraction is two-words for the sun. But Kepler's law would also be true, actually, if things were going away. So, in particular, say, electric force also has this property of being two-words, the central charge. So, actually, if you look at motion of charged particles in an electric field, caused by a point charged particle, it also satisfies the same law.  OK, that's the end for today. Thanks.