 The following content is provided under a Creative Commons license. Your support will help MIT OpenCourseWare continue to offer high-quality educational resources for free. To make a donation or to view additional materials from hundreds of MIT courses, visit MIT OpenCourseWare at ocw.mit.edu. So far, we've seen things about vectors, equations of planes, motions in space, and so on. Basically, we've done geometry in space.  but calculus really is about studying functions. Now we are going to actually move on to studying functions of several variables. This new unit, but what we'll do over the next three weeks or so, will be about functions of several variables and their derivatives. OK, so, first of all, we should try to figure out how we are going to think about functions.  f1 variable, that means you have the quantity that depends on one parameter,  And in the case of a sine function, that looks like this. OK, so now let's say that we have actually a function of two variables. So that means that the value of f depends actually on two different parameters.  or they could have any names you want. So given values of the two parameters x and y, the function will give us a number that will call f of xy that depends on x and y according to some formula. Not very surprising so far.  for example, I can give you the function f of xy equals x2 plus y2. And, of course, as with functions of one variable, we don't need things to be defined everywhere. Sometimes there's a domain of definition. So this one is defined all the time.  x squared of y, well, this is only defined if y is non-negative. If I tell you f of xy equals one of x plus y, well, that's only defined if x plus y is not 0 and so on.  examples given by explicit formulas. And, of course, there's physical examples. So examples coming from real life, for example, you can look at the temperature at a certain point on the surface of the earth. So you use maybe longitude latitude, that's x and y. And then you have f of xy equals the temperature at that point.  xyz, or in fact because temperature depends also, maybe, on how high up you are. It depends on elevation. So it's actually a function of maybe xyz. And it also depends on time. So, in fact, maybe it's a function of  and depend on a lot of variables. So our goal will be to understand how to deal with that.  Now, you'll see very soon that actually it's already tricky enough to picture a function of two variables. So we're going to focus on the case of functions of two variables. And then we'll see that if we have more than two variables, then it's harder to plot the function. We cannot draw what the graph looks like anymore. But the tools are the same. The notion of partial derivatives, gradient vector, and so on. All the tools that we will develop work exactly the same way, no matter how many variables you have.  for simplicity, we'll focus mostly on two, or sometimes three, variables, that it works the same in any number of variables. OK, so the first question is, how do we visualize a function of two variables?  So the first thing we can do is try to hold the graph of f. So maybe I should say f, which is a function of two variables. So the first answer will be we can try to look at its graph. And the idea is the same as with one variable.  we look at all the possible values of the parameters x and y, and for each of them, we plot a point whose height is the value of a function at these parameters. So we'll plot, let's say, z equals f of xy, and now that will become actually a surface in space. So for each value of x and y, we have xy in the xy plane,  will plot the point in space at position xy and z equals f of xy. OK, and if we take all of these points together, they will give us some surface that sits in space. Yes?  x as a function of two variables, if you want. So how do we do that concretely? Say that I give you a formula for f. How do we try to represent it? So let's do our first example. Let's say that I give you the function f of xy equals negative y.  OK, so it looks a little bit silly because it doesn't depend on x, but that's not a problem. It's still a valid function of x and y. It just happens to be constant with respect to x. So to draw the graph, we look at the surface in space defined by z equals minus y. What kind of surface is that? It's a plane, OK, and if we want to draw it,  x equals minus y will look, well, that's the y axis, that's the x axis, that's the z axis. If I look at what happens in the yz plane, in the plane of a blackboard, it will just look like a line that goes downward with slope 1. So it will do this. And what happens if I change x? Well, if I change x, nothing happens because x doesn't appear in this equation. So, in fact, if, instead of setting x equal to 0,  x equal to 1, I mean, in front of a blackboard, or minus 1, at the back. Well, it still looks exactly the same. So I have this plane that actually contains the x-axis and slopes downwards with slope 1. It's kind of hard to draw. Now, you see immediately what the big problem with graphs will be, that these pictures are hard to read.  but so that's our first claim. Any questions so far? OK, so let's say that we have a slightly more complicated function. How do we see it? So let's do another example. Let's say I give you f of xy equals 1 minus x squared minus y squared. So we've tried to pick up  lecture what the surface, z equals 1 minus x square minus y square looks like. So how do we do that? Well, maybe you're actually very fast and you've already figured out what it looks like. But if not, then we need to work piece by piece. So maybe it will help if we understand first what it does in the plane of a blackboard.  So if we look at it in the yz plane, that means we set x equal to 0. And then z becomes 1 minus y squared. What is that? It's a parabola, pointing downward, and starting at 1. OK? So we should draw maybe this downward parabola.  It starts at 1, and it cuts the y-axis at 1. OK, when y is 1, that gives us 0. What do we see? So we might have an idea of what it might look like, or maybe not. Let's get more slices. Let's see what it does in the xz-plane, this other vertical plane that's coming two orders.  So in the x-zero plane, we set y equal to 0, and we get z equals 1 minus x squared. It's, again, a parabola coming downward. OK, so I'm going to try to draw a parabola that goes downward, but now to the front and to the back. So we are starting to have a slightly better idea, but we still don't know whether a cross-section of this thing might be, you know,  something else. So if we want more conformation, we might want to also figure out maybe where does this surface intersect the xy-plane. So we hit the xy-plane when z equals 0.  that becomes x squared plus y squared equals 1, that is a circle of radius 1. OK, that's the unit circle. So that means that here we actually have the unit circle. And now you should imagine that you have this thing that when you slice it by a vertical plane looks like a downward parabola,  you can rotate it around the z-axis. Now, if you stay long enough at that equation, you'll actually see that, yes, actually, a posteriori, we know that it had to be like that. So these are useful ways of trying to guess what the graph looks like. Of course, the other way is to just ask your computer to do it, and then you'll get that kind of formula.  well, I can leave it on if you want, but. No, because I plotted a different function that I will show you later. So it goes this way. I mean, if you want 1 minus, I mean, it's really going downward. Yes, I agree that the sheet is upside down, but that's because I plotted something else. OK. So in fact, well, let me, yeah, so what I plotted in my computer,  was actually x squared plus y squared. And that looks like that. See, it's the same with the parabola going upward. If you want to see more examples, I have various examples to throw. Well, here's the graph of a function, y squared minus x squared. See, so that one is kind of interesting. It looks like a saddle. If you look at it in the yz plane, then it's a parabola going up, z equals y squared.  and that's what we see to the left and to the right.  have small things, and you can see the formula, but it doesn't matter, just to show you that. You can put the formula into a computer, and it will show you a picture. So that's pretty good. I mean, you can see that it can get a bit cluttered, because maybe there's features that are hidden behind, or maybe we have trouble seeing, if we don't have a computer, that looks very readable.  So, there's another way to plot functions of two variables. And, let's call it the contour plot. So, the contour plot is a very elegant solution to the problem that it's difficult to draw space pictures on a sheet of paper or on a blackboard.  by just a map. The same way that when you walk around, you have actually geographical maps that fit in a piece of paper that tell you about what the real world looks like. So what the contour plot looks like is something like this. So it's an xy plot. And on that, you have a bunch of curves. And what the curves represent are the elevations  functions on the graph. So for example, this curve might correspond to all the points where f of x, y equals 1, and that curve might be all the points where f equals 2 and f equals 3, and so on. So when you see this kind of plot, you're supposed to think that the graph of a function is, you know, somewhere sits in space above that.  And what you would want to do with the function really is be able to tell quickly what's the value at a given point. Well, let's say that I want to look at that point. I know that f is somewhere between 1 and 2. Actually, it's much faster to read than the graph. On the graph, I might have to look carefully and then measure things and so on. Here, I can just read the value of f by comparing with the nearby lines.  that know precise, so this shows all the points where f of xy equals some fixed values, some fixed constants. And these constants typically are chosen at regular intervals.  So for example, here I close 1, 2, 3, and they could continue with 0 minus 1 and so on. So one way to think about it, how does this relate to the graph?  have by horizontal planes. So horizontal planes have equations of the form z equals some constant. z equals 0, z equals 1, z equals 2, and so on. So maybe the graph of my function will be some sort of blow about there. And if I slice it by the plane z equals 1,  then I will get the level curve, which is the points where f of xy equals 1. And so that's called a level curve of f. OK, and so we repeat the process with, it is equals 2.  and we get another level curve, and so on. And then we squeeze them all on the map, and that's how we get the control plot. So each of these lines, imagine that this is like some mountain, not something that you're hiking on. Each of these lines tells you how you could move to stay at a constant height. If you want to get to the other side of the mountain, but without ever going up or down,  along that path, and it will get you there without effort. So in fact, if you have been talking about hiking on mountains, well, that's exactly what a topographical map is about. So I need to zoom a bit. So a topographic map, this one is from the US Geological Survey, shows you basically all the way  all the level curves of the altitude function on a piece of land. So you know that if you walk along these curves, you will stay at the same height. And you know that if you walk towards, oh, these don't have numbers, let me find a place with numbers. Here, there's a 500 in the middle. So you know that if you walk on the line that says 500, you stay always at 500 meters in the living.  if you walk towards the mountain, that I think is below it, then you will go up. And so on. So you can see, for example, here there's a peak, and while here was a valley, we've actually ever ever in it, and the altitudes go down and then back up again on the other side. So that's an example of a contour plot of a function. Of course, we don't have a formula for that function, but we have a contour plot. And that's what we need, actually, to understand what's going on there.  OK, any questions? Nope. OK, so another example of control plots. Well, you've probably seen various versions of these, you know, temperature maps. So that's supposed to be how warm it is right now. So, you know, this one is color coded. Instead of having curves, it has all of these colors.  consecutive colors, these are the level curves of a function that tells you the temperature at a given point. So these are examples of control plots in real life. No questions? Nope. So basically, one of the goals that one should try to achieve at this point  And the converse plot, the graph, and how to view and deal with functions.  example, well, let's do a couple of examples. So let's start with f of xy equals minus y. I'm going to take the same two examples as there to start with, so that we see really the relation between the graph and the contour plot. So let's try to plot it. So where's the level curve f equals 0 for this one?  well, f is 0 when y is 0. So that's the x-axis. So that's the level 0.  is negative 2, f is negative 1 when y is 1, and so on. OK? Is that convincing? Do you see how we got that? OK, let me do it again. I didn't see anybody nodding, so that's kind of bad news. So if I want to know, where's the level of curves say 1? I try to set f equal to 1. Let's do this one.  means that negative y is 1, means that y is minus 1, and y equals minus 1, is this horizontal line on this chart. OK. And same with the others. So you can see on this map that the value of a function doesn't depend on x. If you move parallel to the x-axis, nothing happens. If you move in the y direction, it decreases at a constant rate. That's why the controls are evenly spaced.  So how spaced about they are, I'll tell you actually how steep things are. So that corresponds exactly to that picture, except that here we draw x coming to the front and y to the right, so you have to rotate the map by 90 degrees to get to that. It's an unfortunate consequence of a usual way of plotting things in space. So these horizontal lines here correspond, actually, to,  I always want to line this. OK, second example, let's do 1 minus x square minus y  it's really the same thing. So x, y, let's see. Where is this function equal to 0? Well, we say f is 0 on the unit circle. So the 0 level, well, let's say that this is my unit,  x, that's where it's 0. What about f equals 1? Well, that's when x squared plus y squared equals 0.  x1 x squared plus y squared equals 2. That's a circle of radius, square root of 2, which is about 1.4, so it's somewhere here. So that's negative 1. Minus 2, similarly, will be x squared plus y squared equals 3, square root of 3 is about 1.7. And then, minus 3 will be of radius 2 and so on.  So what I want to show here is that minus 3, that's minus 2, what I want to show here is that they are getting closer and closer about. So first, it's concentric circles that tells us that we have a shape, that the solid of the graph is going to be a surface of revolution. Things don't change if I rotate. And second, the level lines, the level curves, are getting closer and closer to each other.  have to travel a shorter distance if I want my altitude to change by one. So this top here is kind of flat, and then it gets steeper and steeper. And that's what we observe on that picture of L. So just to show you a few more, where did I put my? So for x squared plus y squared, the control plus 1,  but looks like this. Maybe actually I'll make it. So it looks exactly the same as this one. But the difference is if you can see the numbers, which are not there, so you can see them, then you would know that instead of decreasing as we move out, this one is increasing as we go out. So that's where we use actually the labels on the level curves that tell us whether things are going up or down.  that the contour plot looks exactly the same. For the next one I had, I think, was y squared minus x squared, so the contour plot, well, let me actually zoom out. So the contour plot looks like that. So the level curve corresponding to 0 is actually two diagonal lines. And if you look on the plot, say that you started with a saddle point in the right,  the middle, and you try to stay at the same level. So it looks like a mountain pass. Well, there's actually four directions from that point that you can go staying at the same height. And actually, on the map, they look exactly like these two cross-crossing lines. So these are things that go on the side of the two mountains that are to the left and right, and stay at the same height as the mountain pass. On the other hand, if you go along the y direction to the left or to the right,  right, then you go towards positive values. And if you go along the x-axis, then you get two-homes negative values. OK. The equation for the function was y square minus x squared. OK. So you can try to plot them by hand and confirm that it does look like that. But I trust my computer.  And, finally, this one, well, so the contour plot looks a bit complicated, but you can see two things. In the middle, you can see these two regions with these concentric circles, actually, they're not really circles, but you know, these closed curves that are concentric and they correspond to the two mountains.  again, like on the plot of x square minus x squared. And so at this set point here, if we go north or south, then we'll go down on either side to the valley. And if we go east or west, then we'll go towards the mountains. We'll go up. Does that make sense? A little bit. So, you know, reading plots is not easy,  Hopefully, we'll get used to it very soon. OK, so actually, let's say, well, OK, so I want to point out one thing. The contour plot tells us, actually, what happens when we move, when we change x and y.  So if I change the value of x and y, that means I'm moving east, west, or north-south on the map. And then I can ask myself, does the value of a function increase or decrease in each of these situations? Well, that's the kind of thing that the control plot can tell me very quickly.  So, say for example that I have a piece of contour plot that looks, no, like that.  maybe this is f equals 1, and this is f equals 2, and here this is f equals 0. And let's say that I start at a point, say at this point. So here I have x0, y0, and the question I might ask myself is if I change x or y, how does f change?  If x increases and they keep y constant, then what happens to f of xy? Well, it will increase because if I move to the right, then I go from 1 to a value bigger than 1. I don't know exactly how much, but I know that it's somewhere between 1 and 2. It's more than 1.  And similarly, I can tell that if y increases, then f will also increase. And if y decreases, then f decreases. And that's the kind of qualitative analysis that we can do easily from the contour plot.  if I change x on y. So to find a rate of change, that's exactly where we use derivatives. We are going to have to deal with partial derivatives. So I will explain to you soon why partial.  So let me just remind you first. If you have a function of one variable, then, so let's say f of x, then you have a derivative f prime of x is also called df d x. And it's defined as a limit when delta x goes to 0 of the change in f.  So, sorry, it's not going to fit.  limit of this rate of increase as delta x goes to 0. Now, of course, if you have a formula for f, then you know, at least you should know, I suspect most of you know how to actually take the derivative of a function from its formula. So now, how do we do that? Oh, sorry. And I should tell you also what this means.  means on the graph. So if I plot the graph of a function, then I have my point x, and here I have half of x. How do I see the derivative? Well, I look at the tangent line to the graph, and the slope of a tangent line is at prime of x. And Rauf in advertising, not every function has a derivative.  you have functions that are not regular enough to actually have a derivative. So in this class, we are not going to actually worry too much about differentiability. But it's good at least to be aware that you can't always take a derivative. So, yes, and what else do I want to remind you of? Well, we also have an approximation formula.  which says that if we have the value of f at some point x0, and then we want to find the value at a nearby point x close to x0, then our best guess is that it's f of x0 plus the derivative f prime at x0 times delta x, or if you want x minus x0.  OK, is this kind of familiar to you? Yeah, I mean, maybe with different notations, maybe you called that delta x or something. Maybe you called that x is a rho plus h or something. But it's the usual approximation formula using the derivative. If you put more terms when you get the dreaded tailor approximation, but I know that you guys don't like. So, OK, so the question  is how do we do the same for a function of two variables, f of xy? So the difficulty there is we can change x, or we can change y, or we can change both. And, presumably, the manner in which f changes will be different, depending on whether we change x or y. So that's why we have several different no-fence of derivative.  So we have a notation.  And the definition, OK, so this is a curly d. And it is not a straight d, and it is not a delta. It's a d that kind of curls backwards like that. And the way you read this symbol is partial. OK, so it's a special notation for partial derivatives. And essentially, what it means is we are going to do a derivative where we care about only one variable at a time.  other variables. So a function of several variables doesn't have a usual derivative. It has only partial derivatives for each variable. So the partial derivative, the partial f partial x at x0, y0, is defined to be the limit when I take a small change in x delta x of x.  the change in f divided by delta x. So here I'm actually not changing y at all. I'm just changing x and looking at the rate of change with respect to x. And I have the same with respect to y, partial f, partial y is the limit, so I should say, at a point,  x0, y0, is the limit as delta y tends to 0. So this time I keep x the same that I change y. So that's the definition of the partial derivative. And we say that the function is differentiable if these things exist.  will see are differentiable and will actually learn how to compute their partial derivatives without having to do this. Of course, we'll just use the useful methods for computing derivatives. So in fact, I claim you already know how to take partial derivatives. So let's see what it means, geometrically.  So, geometrically, my function can be represented by its graph. And, you know, I fixed some point x0, y0. And then I'm going to ask myself what happens if I change the value of x, keeping y constant.  x, it means I'm moving forward or backward, parallel to the x-axis. So that determines, for me, a vertical plane, parallel to the x-esip plane, when I fix y equals constant. And now, if I slice the graph by that, I will get some curve that goes, which is a slice of the graph of f.  And now, what I want to find is how f depends on x, if I keep y constant. That means it's the right of change if I move along this curve. So in fact, if I look at the slope of this thing, so if I draw the tangent line to this slice, then the slope will be partial f of our partial x.  So I take the graph, I slice it by a vertical plane, I get a curve, and now I take the slope of that curve, and that gives me the powerful derivative. And to finish, let me just tell you how, sorry, and I should say,  is the same thing, but slicing now by a plane, that goes in the yz directions. So I fix x equals constant. That means I slice by a plane that's parallel to the blackboard. I get a curve, and I look at the slope of that curve. So it's just a matter of fongating one variable, setting it constant and looking at the other one only. So how to compute these things?  we actually, to find, oh, there's a piece of notation I haven't told you yet. So another notation you will see, I think this is what one uses a lot in physics, and this is what one uses a lot in applied math, which is the same thing as physics, but with different notations. OK, so there's two different notations, partial f, partial x, or f subscript x, and they are the same thing. Well, we just treat y as a constant.  x as variable. And vice versa if we want to find partial with respect to y. So let me just finish with one quick example. Let's say that I give you f of xy equals x cubed y plus y squared, then partial f partial x.  So here, it's x cubed times the constant. The derivative of y squared is 0, because it's a constant. If you do, instead, partial f partial y, then this is actually a constant times y.  which one is of a variable, which one is not? OK, so more about this next time, and we'll also learn about maxima and minima in several variables.