So we proved these two theorems last time, and we use them for, and we had a couple applications of them. So the first theorem, simple theorem, was that a sequence converges to x, if and only if the limit as n goes to infinity of the absolute value  value of xn minus x goes to 0. And then we also had the squeeze theorem that if you have three sequences, a sub n, b sub n and x sub n, so that x sub n is in between a sub n and b sub n. And the a sub n and b sub n converge to the same thing, then the sequence x sub n converges and it converges to the common limit of a sub n and b sub n.  So this equals 0.  1, but same proof works with absolute values, just because the absolute value of c to the n equals the absolute value of c raised to the n power. So let's use this to do a few more special limits if you like. But first, I'm going to state the binomial theorem. I'm not going to prove it, but it's a simple exercise using  induction, and the Bidelm-Miel theorem says that all n in natural numbers, x, y, and r, x plus y raised to the n is equal to the sum from k equals 0 to n of n choose k. x to the n minus k, x is less than x.  y to the k. And here, n choose k. This is equal to n factorial over k factorial divided by n minus times n minus k factorial. So again, you can prove this by inducting on n.  We have a theorem, so we'll prove a few special limits. I have a real number that's positive. Then limit as n goes to the goes to infinity of 1 over n to the p equals 0.  if p is positive, then limit as n goes to infinity of p to the 1 over n equals 1. And the third is, it's just that a certain limit exists, limit as n goes to infinity of n to the 1 over n equals 1.  So, let me make a small comment here. So, so far in our discussion of the real numbers, we've kind of only defined what it means to take a real number to an integer power, but end inth roots, right? So, we have inth powers and inth roots.  So using that, we can then define how to take a real number to a rational power, although there needs to be something that's check to make sure this is well defined, because you can always write a rational number as not uniquely as one integer over another.  power, but using really only the elementary facts about the real numbers, the fact that it has the least upper bound property, and the fact that the rationals are somehow dense in the real numbers, we can then define what it means to take a positive real number to a positive real number power. All of that is just to say that to define a positive real number,  to a positive real number or to a real number power, doesn't require the introduction of the exponential or logarithm. Although, they in the end, they both agree, once you do have the exponential and the logarithm. So all of that is just to say that what we've done up to now, these things actually do make sense. You don't need the exponential and the logarithm to make sense of a positive real number to a real number.  number power. OK? But we're just going to use the basic properties of exponents throughout all this. So we don't. I mean, we haven't even talked about continuity or derivatives or anything like that. So we'll just use elementary means to be able to prove these statements. OK? So for the first one, we'll prove this actually just using the definition of the limit.  which remember means for every epsilon positive there, we should be able to find a capital number M such that if n is bigger than or equal to capital M, 1 over n to the p is less than epsilon. So, that epsilon to be positive, choose M a natural number such that M is greater than or equal to,  is greater than 1 over epsilon to the 1 over p. OK? And if n is bigger than or equal to m, 1 over n to the p minus 0, which equals 1 over n to the p, this is less than or equal to 1 over capital M to the p. So here, again, I'm using,  kind of an elementary fact that we all know is that if I have a positive power here, then and little n is bigger than or equal to capital M, then n to the p would be bigger than or equal to capital M to the p. We do know that for integer exponents, but just trust me that one can define non-integer exponents and that inequality remains true as long as the power that you're using is positive.  So I have 1 over n to the p is less than or equal to 1 over capital M to the p, and by our choice of capital M, this is less than epsilon. So that proves number 1. So number 2, we really only need to do kind of two cases. 1 is p. So p equals 1 is fine.  So this is clear because then I just get 1 for the whole sequence. So that's one case. Now let me do p bigger than 1. OK? And if p is bigger than 1, the absolute value of p to the 1 over n minus 1, this is just p to the 1 over n minus 1.  this quantity here goes to 0. So we have an inequality which we proved, actually, in the second lecture, I think, using induction.  equal to minus 1, then 1 plus x raised to the n is bigger than or equal to 1 plus nx. OK? And so we use this inequality now with x equals p minus 1. So p, this is equal to 1 plus p to the 1 over n minus 1 raised to the nth power,  I'm sorry, x is p to the 1 over n minus 1, not p minus 1. And now we use this inequality. This is bigger than or equal to this thing times n plus 1. So then I'll go over here. So now subtracting the 1 and divided by n tells me that p minus 1 is less than 1.  to the 1 over n minus 1 is less than or equal to p minus 1 over n. And as we noted here, since p is bigger than 1, this is bigger than or equal to 0. OK? And now we apply the squeeze theorem. By a squeeze theorem, this is just going to 0. P minus 1 divided by n, that's just the number over n. This goes to 0 as n goes to n.  infinity and in fact that's contained in number 1, for p equals 1. And also by our limit facts that we proved from last time that the limit respects the algebraic operations of the real numbers. So by the squeeze theorem, since this converges to 0, and this converges to 0, this converges to 0,  which implies that. OK? So that deals with the case p is bigger than 1. To deal with p less than 1, we use the case p bigger than 1 and, again, the fact that limits respect algebraic operations.  And we write the limit as p, let's look in p, make that better. The limit as n goes to infinity of p to the 1 over n, now p is less than 1, so 1 over p is bigger than 1, this is equal to the limit as n goes to infinity of 1 over 1 over p to the 1 over n. And now 1 over p is bigger than 1, raised to the 1 over n power, converges to infinity,  So 1 by the case we did before, and so 1 over this converges to 1 over 1 equals 1. OK? OK, so let me just remark that although we did prove this inequality for,  by induction, it actually follows from the binomial theorem, and we'll use the binomial theorem to get a little bit of a different inequality that we'll use for number 3. So for number 3, we want to prove limit as n goes to infinity of n over 1 over n equals 1. So rather than keep writing n to the 1 over n minus 1, which I want to prove,  on a show converges to 0 now, I'm going to write xn. So let xn equal n to the 1 over n minus 1, which we note is bigger than or equal to 0 for all n. OK? And so my goal, I want to show, is limit as n goes to infinity of x sub n equals 1.  0, because then that proves that this converges to 0, and since this is equal to its absolute value, that means that n to the 1 over n converges to 1. And the way we're going to do that is using an inequality we get from the binomial theorem. And using kind of this trick here, now, if we look at the real numbers,  look at 1 plus x to the n raised to the n.  sum from k equals 0 to n, n choose k, and I have one raised to the n minus k power, x to the n raised to the k. Now, this is a sum of non-negative things, because x sub n is always non-negative, and these coefficients are just  quotient of factorials, so they're always non-negative as well. So this sum is always bigger than or equal to one term from the sum. So it's bigger than or equal to k equals 2, say, y2, you'll see, x sub n squared. Now, in choose 2, this is equal to n factorial over 2 factorial n minus 2.  Factorial x to the n-squares, x of n-squared, which equals n times n minus 1 over 2, x of n-squared. Now, I started off with n, and I proved it was bigger than or equal to this quantity here. So now I divide what's in front of the x of n,  And take square roots, so then that implies that we're all in bigger than 1, because I need to divide by n minus 1, 0, which is bigger than or equal to n, x sub n is less than or equal to 2 over n minus 1 square root. OK?  And now this is just 0, so it converges to 0. This right-hand side is square root of 2 over n minus 1. Now, the limit as n goes to infinity of 2 over n minus 1 is 0, square root of that. Also converges to 0, that's a fact we did from the end of last time. So this whole thing converges to 0. So by the squeeze theorem, limit as n goes to infinity,  of x sub n, which remember this is just n to the 1 over n minus 1, which implies, OK? And that completes the proof.  So now we are going to study a couple of objects related to a bounded sequence. So why are we going to? What's the underlying question we're going to try to answer? Whenever something's introduced, you should think of it in terms of what's the question that was asked that this is trying to answer. So we're now moving on to the topic of,  lim sup and lim inf of a sequence. So here's the question. So we've seen sequences that don't necessarily converge, like minus 1 to the n.  to pick entries along the sequence, you pick one, move to the right, pick the next one. Now, if you look at minus 1 to the n, if I just look at the subsequence consisting of picking the odd entries, the odd-numbered entries in the sequence, then I just get minus 1 minus 1 minus 1 for my new subsequence, and this converges, it's just constant. Or if I chose the even ones, I'd get 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1.  converges, so this sequence, which is bounded, has a convergent subsequence. Now, not all sequences have convergent subsequences. For example, if you look at the sequence x sub n equals n, so x sub n is just 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, and so on, that will not have any convergent subsequences, because any subsequence of that has to be unbounded. That's pretty easy to show.  And we know that a convergent sequence is bounded. So what am I getting at? So the question that we're going to ask and try to answer is the following. Does every bounded sequence have a?  Convergent subsequence. OK, and what I was just going on about right there is that we know this is true for example for the sequence minus 1 to the n. We also know this is true for convergence sequences. Convergence sequences are bounded. So, and they have convergent subsequences.  begin with, and we have to throw in this bounded part, because there are sequences that don't have any convergence subsequences, like I just said x sub n equals n is an example of an unbounded sequence that doesn't have any convergent sequences, subsequences. So the answer to this question, as we'll see, is yes, and this is really a very powerful statement.  And this is due to Bolzano and Weierstrass. And I'll restate it in a little bit when we get to the statement of that theorem, namely that every bounded sequence does have a convergent subsequence. There's several different ways to prove this theorem. We're going to prove it by introducing lim sup and lim m's, because these are also two important objects that arise in the limit.  and analysis, so let's get to the definition of these guys. So let x in be bounded sequence, and we,  define if they exist, there are going to be certain limits. So it's not clear that they exist at all to begin with. But we'll show that they always do exist. We define lim sup x sub n, and sometimes I'll write n goes to infinity underneath. Sometimes I'll just write lim sup, or I'll just have an n underneath it.  a number, and this is equal to the limit as n goes to infinity of a new sequence obtained from the old sequence x sub n. What are the entries of this new sequence? This is sup of x of k bigger than or equal to n. And the liminf is similar, except it's now  with M's. So for each natural number n, I take the supremum of the set of elements x sub k for k bigger than or equal to n. So this is a bounded set because the sequence is bounded. So this supremum is well defined. Same thing for the M. So I get a number.  are a new number for each n. And I take the limit of those numbers, and I define one to be the lim sup, one to be the lim mth, if they exist, because limits don't always exist. So it's not even clear that these two limits actually are meaningful. And the first thing that we'll do is we'll prove that these limits do actually always exist.  So rather than keep writing this, I'm going to give these, write some symbols for these two things. So let a sub n to be. So of course, if I forget to say this, at least in what I'm talking about with respect to lim sup and liminf, I'm always talking about a bounded sequence, but let me continue to state that as one of my hypothesis.  into sequence and let a sub n be the supremum of the set of all elements x of k, where k is bigger than or equal to n. And b sub n to be the infimum of a sub n.  x sub k, a bigger than or equal to n. So then there's a couple of statements. One is that the sequence a sub n, so remember I take, so let me just put over here,  what these things have to do with the lim sup and lim mth, then you can, then the lim sup of x of n, this is defined to be the limit as n goes to infinity of the a sub n's and the lim mth of x of n, this is defined to be the limit as n goes to infinity of the b sub n's. So we need to show what we're going to show is that,  the limit of a sub n as n goes to infinity of a sub n exists and the limit as n goes to infinity of b sub n exists. So how we're going to show that is we're going to show that a sub n is monotone decreasing and bounded.  are the conclusions, so I should say. Then the sequence b sub n is monotone increasing and bounded. So in particular, since we know that  if we have a monotone sequence which is bounded, it has to converge. That means these two limits exist. And then the second part of this theorem is kind of the simple statement that,  the liminf of x sub n is less than or equal to the lim sup of x sub n. OK? OK, to prove one, so in fact, before I prove this theorem, let me prove a small  So simple kind of theorem first. So let's put the proof of this theorem on hold just for a second. And now prove a very simple theorem that if a and b are subsets of real numbers, a, b, both not equal to the empty set, and a is a subset of b,  So also need to be bounded. So if we take two non-empty subsets of real numbers, such that b are bounded. And a is a subset of b, then the conclusion is that the inf of b  is less than or equal to the inf of A, and this is always less than or equal to the soup of A, and this is less than or equal to the soup of B. So what this says is that if I take a subset of B, then that increases the Mth, and decreases the soup.  So the soup of a smaller set is smaller than the soup of the bigger set. And that inequality reverses for imps. The imp of the smaller set is bigger than or equal to the imp of the bigger set. And this just follows immediately from the definition of soup and imp. So I'll just prove the soup statement.  c is an upper bound for b and a is a subset of b. This implies that sub b is an upper bound for a.  b sits above everything in b, a is a subset of b, so it sits above everything for a. Now, the supremum of a is supposed to be the least upper bound, and therefore, if I take any upper bound for a, that has to be bigger than or equal to the soup of a. So, since soup b is an upper bound for a, this implies that soup a is less than or equal to soup b. And similarly with the M. So I'm not going to write,  So similar for, OK, so let's go back to the proof of this theorem here, that if I have a bounded sequence, then the lim sup and the lim m exist. And we show that by proving that.  So these two sequences have these monotoneicity properties. So proof now of the theorem, we were started off proving. OK. So since the set of xk's with k bigger than or equal to n plus 1,  a subset of x k's for k bigger than or equal to n, right? Because now I have a set where k starting at n plus 1, here's the set with k starting at n. So this is clearly contained in here. This implies that a sub n plus 1, which is the soup of the left-hand side by this little theorem that I stated.  here is less than or equal to the sup of the bigger set, and this is just a sub n. So we've proven for all n a sub n plus 1 is less than or equal to a sub n. OK, and therefore this sequence is monotone decreasing.  OK. And so this uses the soup part of this previous theorem. But if we use the mth part, then we also get the statement for the b sub n. So rather than write out the details, I'll leave it to you just to flip around the inequalities for the mth in your notes. So similarly, we're all in an natural number.  actual number, b sub n is bigger than or equal to b sub n plus 1, or another way. OK? Now, so that shows these two sequences are monotone. Now we show they're bounded, and this follows simply from the fact that the x-n,  x sub n's are bounded, since there exists a b bigger than or equal to 0, such that, all in, natural numbers, x sub n in absolute value is less than or equal to b, which is the same as saying b is x sub n is bounded between minus b and capital B. So, taken as,  Elements of each of these sets, if you like, this x of k, k bigger than or equal to n, that means minus b is always a lower bound for these sets, and b is always an upper bound for these sets. So this implies that minus b is always less than or equal to x of k, k bigger than or equal to n, and,  This always sits below the supremum. And the supremum, since all of these are bounded above by b, the supremum has to be less than or equal to b. OK? Which I'll state in terms of the a sub n's and b sub n's means minus b is less than or equal to b sub n is less than or equal to b. So these sequences are bounded.  So in fact, these two implies that. So we've shown that these two sequences that define, that we use to define the lim sup and the lim inf, are monotone and bounded. So therefore, the limit of these two sequences  limits, which define the lim sup and lim inf, actually exists. So lim sup and lim inf is always a well-defined object. Now, this proves 1, to prove 2, this follows immediately from what we've proven right here. So by this part, we have b sub n is less than or equal to a sub n. So for all n, I have these two sequences, 1 sitting below the other,  And last time we proved that taking the limit respects inequality, so limit as n goes to infinity of b sub n, which is the lim inf sits below limit as n goes to infinity of a sub n, which is the lim sup. And that completes the proof. So I've shown that these two objects we define, the lim sup and the lim sup, and the lim sup, and the lim sup,  and mth exist and are well-defined for every bounded sequence. So this is kind of, it can be a little bit of a daunting couple of objects to come across when you, especially in your first analysis class. So the best thing to do is look at examples. Whenever you come across something that you just don't quite understand, start writing down,  So some actual things. So for example, let's again look at our favorite example of a bounded sequence, which does not converge. x sub n equals minus 1 to the n. Then if I am looking at this set x sub n, in bigger than or equal to n,  and are equal to k, writing a set of x sub n, let me just write what it is, minus 1 to the n. So what is this set? This is just a set consisting of two elements, 1 and minus 1. Yeah? And therefore, the soup of this set, which is the soup of this set, is just 1.  So if I take, which implies that the lim sup minus 1 to the n, which is the limit as n goes to infinity of sup  minus 1 to the n, n bigger than or equal to the k. As we just saw, this is just a soup of this set consisting of two elements, 1 and minus 1. This is equal to the limit as n goes to infinity of 1 equals 1. So the lim sup of minus 1 to the n is 1. Now, if I change all these soups to imps, then the imp of this set is going to be the imp of this set, which is just minus 1. And therefore, we also get,  So the lim sup is 1, the lim inf is minus 1 for this set. That's just supposed to be a squiggly line, not necessarily looking like a sigma. OK, so there's one sequence.  So our next favorite sequence, x sub n equals 1 over n. So the set of elements, 1 over n, such that n is bigger than or equal, so 1 over k, I should write. Oh, so I was using some, this should have been a k. I'm going to make that in the state throughout.  writing x sub k. So this should be x sub k. OK, all of that is written correctly. This should have been minus 1 to the k, minus 1 to the k. All right, very good. So we're looking at now the set 1 over k, wherein is where k is,  is bigger than or equal to n. So this is just the set 1 over n, 1 over n plus 1, 1 over n plus 2, 1 over n plus 3, and so on. OK? So as I move to next, the next entry things are getting smaller and smaller,  And in fact, this sequence just here, now written as thinking of this as a new, so this is not a sequence, this is a set. But taking entries to be these guys, it's easy to see that that converges to 0. So anyways, let's say I take the supremum of this set, which is what I need to compute the lim sup. So I'm now taking the supremum of this set, 1 over n plus 1,  1, that's always smaller than 1 over n, and so is 1 over n plus 2, and so on, and so on. And 1 over n is an element of the set that's bigger than or equal to everything else in the set. And I think there's an exercise in the homework that ask you to show that if you have a set that contains an element which is an upper bound for the set, then that has to be the supremum. So the supremum of this set is simply 1 over n.  So this supremum is equal to 1 over n. So as n goes to infinity, the limit of this supremum here, which equals the limit as n goes to infinity of 1 over n equals 0. OK, so the limps  So I look at the limps. So now let's say I take inps.  there's 0 1 over n, and then they just keep getting smaller and smaller and smaller and smaller converging to 0. So, and you can, in fact, prove this rigorously if you like, but I think it's easy to at least convince yourself that the infimum of this set is equal to 0, OK? The smallest thing, so first off, 0 is a lower bound for this set.  anything bigger than 0, that thing cannot be an upper bound simply because of if you like the Archimedean property, I can always find something from the set less than that real positive real number. So 0 must be the least upper bound. So in summary, the liminf of 1 over n, which is the limit as n goes to infinity of the n.  The length of this set is just the limit as n goes to infinity of 0, which equals 0. So the lim sup of 1 over n equals 0, the lim m equals 0 as well.  So let's take a look at these two examples, a little bit, and let me just make a few remarks. First off, what's to notice about this sequence is the fact that the limps sup is 1, lim m is equal to minus 1. So the lim sup does not equal to the lim m.  However, in this example, the lim sup, which is 0, equals the lim inf, which is 0. Now, what's the difference between these two sequences? What's the property that one holds, but the one has what the other doesn't? This is a convergent sequence, and this one is not. So, and we'll see this is a general fact that if we have a convergent sequence, then the lim sup and the lim inf equal each other, and are equal to the limit of the original sequence.  is a sequence converges to 0. But that's not just a one-way street. It's a two-way street that, in fact, will prove if the lim sup equals the lim inf, then the original sequence converges. So the sequence converges if and only if the lim sup equals the lim inf. And we saw here that kind of that in on display that the lim sup and the lim inf don't equal each other, and the original sequence,  So we know or shown last time doesn't converge. And so one other thing I'd like to point out is that so the lim sup of this guy is 1, the lim inf of this guy is a minus 1. And now we can also find a subsequence which converges to 1, which is the lim sup, right? We just take the entries that we choose to be the  even numbered entries, and that just produces a sequence 1, and that sequence converges to 1. If we take the odd entries of the sequence, that subsequence is just minus 1 and converges to minus 1, which is the limm-inf. And that's also a general fact we proved, that for any bounded sequence, there exists subsequences converging to the limm-soop and the limm-inf. And that will give us proof of this Bolzano-Weierstrass theorem.  all right, and I think that's all of the remarks I want to say. And let me make one other important comment. So this sequence, which we use to define the lim sup and also the lim inf. And these, in three out of these four cases, they were actual subsequences, right? So the sup of this set equals 1, which I can consider as a subsequence of the original guy, right?  And the same thing for the lim mth. The lim, the mth of this set was minus 1, which I can consider as a subsequence of minus 1 to the n. And for the soup of this set, I got 1 over n, which I can, this is just equal to the original sequence. So it's set, definitely, I can consider it as a subsequence of the original sequence. But if I take the infimum of this set, which I need to define the lim mth,  We've got 0 for every entry, which is not a subsequence of this original sequence. So all of that is to say that the sequences I get through this process to define the lim sup and lim m are not necessarily subsequences of the original sequence. So what I just said a minute ago about there actually being subsequences which do converge to the lim sup and lim m.  we're going to prove. So theorem, and this will give us a Bolzano-Weierstrass, essentially, immediately right after it. Let xn be a bounded sequence.  And there exists subsequences xn sub k and xm sub k. So they don't necessarily have to be the same sub sequence. Subsequence, such that limit as k goes to infinity of x sub n sub k equals,  the lim sup, so it's a convergence subsequence, and the limit as k goes to infinity of x m sub k, produces the lim m. OK? And so before I prove this, this immediately gives the Bolzano-Vierstrass theorem,  which is that every bound is sequence, as a convergent subsequence.  So again, this follows immediately from the previous theorem, because if I take a bounded sequence, by the previous theorem, I can find a subsequence which converges to the lim sup, which always exists for a bounded sequence. And then that's the statement. In fact, we have something stronger in that we have at least two subsequences which converge to these two numbers, which may or may not be the same.  So the reason this is kind of so powerful and so strong is that it to sort of get your hands on something, it doesn't require you to show something as strong as showing there is a sequence converging to that.  where you want to show that a minimum of something always exists, or a, you know, maximum of something always exists, well, what you can try and do is, you know, take a sequence of guys that you stick into your, so this is a general nonsense that you stick into your machine or function that spits out output, and these outputs are approaching the maximum or approaching the minimum. And what you'd like to say is that,  that there does, in fact, exist an element that you can stick into your machine, and produce the maximum amount of output. Now, maybe it's not clear how to do that. So first, take a sequence approaching, so that the values are approaching that the outputs are approaching the maximum. Maybe you could show that the inputs converge to something, but that's typically really  hard, but you don't have to work that hard, is what this theorem says. It says that what you really need to do, and which is much more straightforward, or simpler, or possible, really, is to show that sequence of inputs that you put into your machine to get the outputs, is a bounded sequence. Then you could pass to a subsequence, which actually does converge to something by this theorem.  I'm going to proceed in that way by showing that you do have some minimum or maximum, some input that produces a maximum output or minimum output. So that's a bit, a small bit of rambling about why this theorem is so useful, is that, again, it's, to get your hands on something that typically you want to study, it's very difficult to show,  convergence to that thing you want to study. Or that thing exists because there's a sequence that you come up with ad hoc actually converges to that thing. But this theorem says you don't need to work that hard or try to do the impossible and typically it's much easier just to proceed by showing your sequence of inputs is bounded. OK, so that's enough of that bit of rambling about why this theorem is so useful.  useful, it's also useful in the study of PDEs, which is what I study. So I have a soft spot for it. Actually, one of its generalizations. All right, so let's prove this theorem that there exists subsequences which converge to the lim sup and liminf. OK? So as before, I'm going to use, rather than keep writing, the supremum of this,  is set, and I'm not going to, actually, I'm not even going to do this statement. I'm going to leave this as an exercise. I'm going to do this statement. I'm going to use this notation a sub n as before. The a sub n b, the sup of x sub k's, k bigger than or equal to n. So I want to show that there's something converging to the limit as n goes to infinity of the a sub n.  And so what I'm going to do is I'm going to trap a subsequence of elements between a sub n and a sub n minus something which is converging to 0 and not quite a sub n's, it'll be along with a subsequence as well. So we know that there exists an n sub 1 bigger than or equal to 1 simply by how this is defined as a supremum, and the limit of x sub n is  And by the exercise from assignment 3, that there exists an n sub 1 bigger than or equal to 1, such that a sub 1 minus 1 is less than or equal to x less than x sub 1 is less than or equal to a sub 1.  I mean, that's a sub 1 minus 1 is not an upper bound for the set a sub 1, which is x of k's for k's bigger than or equal to 1. Therefore, I should be able to find an element from this set, strictly bigger than that. And of course, it's always less than or equal to the supremum, which is a sub 1. OK?  So a sub n sub 1 plus 1, not 1 plus 1, since this thing equals the supremum of x of k, such k is bigger than or equal to n sub 1 plus 1, there exists an a, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b, b  a sub n sub 2, at least there exists a n sub 2 bigger than n sub 1. In fact, it has to be bigger than or equal to n sub 1 plus 1, such that a sub n plus 1 minus 1 1 1 1 is less than or equal to a sub n plus 1.  So why the n sub 1 plus 1 is because I wanted to obtain a new entry from the sequence that comes from farther than the index in sub 1. OK? I'm trying to build a subsequence. And like I said, the idea is I want to somehow sandwich this should be x of n. I want to build up a subsequence which is sandwiched between things converging to c.  to the lim sup and use the squeeze theorem. So since this is a supremum of this set, and because this thing is not an upper bound for this set, there exists something from this set, so some element k bigger than or equal to n sub 1 plus 1, which I'm going to call n sub 2. So that x of n sub 2 is bigger than a sub n plus 1, and a sub n sub 1.  1, plus 1. And then I just keep doing this. Since a sub 2 plus 1 equals the supremum of the x of k, such that k is bigger than or equal to n sub 2, plus 1, there exists an n sub 3 bigger than n sub 2,  such that a sub n sub 2 plus 1 minus now a third, is less than x of n sub 3, is less than or equal to a sub n sub 2 plus 1.  but now we're essentially home free. We'll just continue in this manner. So let me write down. Now strictly speaking, I need to state the construction of this sequence as an inductive argument.  for the purposes of this class, I'm not going to do that. I'm just going to say, continuing in this manner. And that will be what I say for this part. So continuing in this manner,  We obtain a sequence of integers, natural numbers, n sub 1, less than n sub 2, less than n sub 3, so on, such that what holds, such that for all k,  natural number, a sub n sub k minus 1 plus 1, minus 1 over k is less than or equal to x, in sub k, less than or equal to a, so in sub k minus 1, plus 1.  OK? And here, if you like, we didn't define what n sub 0 is. So really, we're only interested in the n sub 1, n sub 2. So but for the sake of this whole thing, making sense for all integers k, with n sub 0 being  defined to be 0. OK, that's just the first case that we dealt with. OK, so we obtained this subsequence x of n sub k, that's sandwiched in between this subsequence of a's, OK, and minus 1 over k, and this subsequence of a's of n sub k minus 1.  And so 1 is less than n sub 2, and so on. This implies that, right at this way, n plus 1 is less than n sub 2 plus 1, is less than n sub 3 plus 1. So this is a subsequence, a sub n sub k,  k minus 1 plus 1 is a subsequence of a sub n's. Now, what do we know? We know that a sub n's converge to the lim sup. And we proved last time that every subsequence of a convergence sequence converges to the same thing.  Thus, the limit as k goes to infinity of a sub n sub k minus 1 plus 1, equals the limit of the original sequence, which is, by definition, the limpsuit. So now I have this subsequence of x's,  sandwiched in between two sequences, this guy on the left, this guy on the right, this guy on the right converges to the limps sup, this guy on the left converges to the limps sup minus 0, because 1 over k converges to 0. So by the squeeze theorem, we get that the limit as k goes to infinity of x of n sub k equals the limit as k goes to infinity  of this and this whole thing, which is the limps soup. OK? And again, so I'll leave it to you to do the liminf part. But the point is is that now, basically, this 1 over k gets moved over here, and this becomes a sub n sub k minus 1, plus 1.  plus 1 over k, and now I just have this on sitting below this guy. That's really the only change for the infs, to get a subsequence converging to the liminf. Now, we've shown that there exists a subsequence converging to the lim sup and the liminf,  gives us the Bolzano-Vierstrass theorem. And now, let me come back to the statement I made about these two sequences here, namely that the limps-sup equals the liminf, if and only if the original sequence converges. So let's prove that now.  x sub n be bounded sequence, then x n converges if and only if the lim sup equals the lim inf. And there's one more part.  more over if x and converges, then all these limits agree. Equals the lim sup, equals the limit. So the sequence converges if and only if the lim sup equals the lim mth, and in that case that,  we do have this limit of the sequences given by this common value of the lim sup and lim inf. OK, so let's go in one direction. To do this direction, we'll use the squeeze theorem. So suppose L equals 1,  equals lim sup x of n equals the lim M of x of n. So here, we're assuming that these two things equal each other. They're given by a common value L. And what we're going to end up showing is that this sequence converges to L. So that actually gives the second part of the statement of the theorem here. So suppose L is this common number,  lim sup and lim m, then for all in a natural number, we have that the mth of the x of k's, which is for k bigger than or equal to n. So x sub n is in this set. So it's certainly bigger than or equal to this m. And it's less than or equal to the sup of that set.  again, because x sub n sits in this set. All right? But as n goes to infinity, this sequence of numbers converges to the limm-inf, which is L, as n goes to infinity, this sequence of numbers converges to the limps sup, which is L. So by the squeeze theorem, the thing in between, which is x sub n converges to L.  So for the second part, it follows from what we've proven, what we proved to obtain the epsilon of R.  And what we know about convergent sequences, and their subsequences. So this direction, namely that convergence implies the lim sup equals n-lim mth. So let L be the limit as n goes to infinity of x sub n. So now we're assuming that the sequence converges to something which we call L, then  have to be the same L from, it's not going to be. So it's just L I'm just using for this limit by previous theorem. There exists a subsequence, x of n sub k, such that the limit as k goes to 0.  infinity of x sub n sub k gives me limsup of x of n. But this is a subsequence of a convergent sequence. And a subsequence of a convergent sequence is convergent and converges to the same thing. So this thing on the left is just equal to L.  OK? Similarly, there exists a subsequence x of n sub k, such that the limit as k goes to infinity of x of m sub k equals the lim mth of x of n. And again, this is a  subsequence of a convergent sequence, so it's convergent and convergence of the  at the end of proof of this theorem, that the lim sup and lim inf, when they coincide and tell you that the original sequence converges. So that's another way of thinking about lim sup and lim infs is that they also somehow measure just how divergent your sequence is, or at least the difference between them. If that difference is 0, then your original sequence is convergent.  So I think we'll stop there.